Cybernetics 


AtoZ 


Buxrrop Ilexeauc. Manenbkan snyukionequa o OonbmMOi KHOepHeTUKe 


Msyatrenserso «]letcKkaa amteparypa». Mocksa 


CYBERNETICS Aw Z 
VY. PEKELIS 


Translated from the Russian by M. Samokhvalov 


Mir 
Publishers 
Moscow 


First published 1974 


Revised from the 1970 Russian edition 


THE RUSSIAN ALPHABET AND ITS TRANSLITERATION 


Aaa 33 2 IIu p I] mn ts 
Bo b Iu i Ppr U4 ch 
BB v Kx k Ces Ill m sh 
Trg Ion 1 Trt Ul uy shch 
Had Mm m VYyu bI sry 
Eee Ha n Op f 939 e 
Na zh Ooo X x kh 1O 1 yu 
fl @ ya 


Ha aneauiicrom savike 


© English translation, Mir Publishers, 1974 


CONTENTS 


Foreword to the English Edition 7 
Study Cybernetics 9 

Algorithm 11 

Automatics 16 

Automatization 24 

Automaton 31 

Binary System of Notation 37 
Bionics 42 

Black Box 48 

Calculating Hardware 53 
Capacity of Memory 63 
Computer Centre 71 

Control Computer 77 
Cybernetics 83 

Cybernetics in Biology 88 
Data Handling 97 

Entropy 104 

Feedback 141 

Formalization 116 

Games Theory 123 

Heuristics 134 

Identification of Images 137 
Identification of Speech Sounds 144 


Information 152 


Jacquard’s Method 160 

Key to the Cipher 169 
Language, Computer 175 
Linguistics, Mathematical 181 
Logic, Mathematical 187 
Microminiaturization 196 
Modelling 205 

Music, Electronic 214 
Numbers in a Computer 223 
Optimal Control 228 
Programming 237 
Psychology, Engineering 244 
Quality Control 251 
Reliability 255 

Robot 260 

Self-Adapting System 264 
Semiotics 270 

Teaching Machine 275 
Translation, Computer 284 


Universal Electronic Digital 
Computer 286 


Video Display 294 
Word 297 
X, Y, Z—Calculation Mathematics 


Foreword 
to the English Edition 


The appearance of the English translation of the book on cybernetics makes 
the author feel additional responsibility. This is because literature on cyberne- 
tics written in this language is quite voluminous. It contains books by renowned 
authorities on the subject such as N. Wiener, W. R. Ashby, C. Shannon, G. Wal- 
ter, and numerous popular-science books, to name the works of J. Murphy, D. Fink, 
A.M. Andrew, A. Cote as the most noteworthy. 

And still the author does not hesitate to present his book to the reader because 
many chapters of the book tell of Soviet achievements in cybernetics and compu- 
ter technology, and they, as is well known, are formidable. People interested 
in the achievements of Soviet specialists following their original ways in various 
fields of cybernetics would do well to learn of them from this book. 

The book, moreover, differs appreciably from numerous other books on this 
subject. It was the intention of the author to write an easily understandable 
popular-science book which would contain some amusing, or even humouristic, 
elements and, at the same time, abide by the principle of an encyclopaedia in 
the alphabetical arrangement and im a serious and scientifically correct exposi- 
tion of the subject matter. 

This, naturally, was no easy task. 

Three books had to be combined in one so that one could be read, the other 
looked over, the third used as a manual. 

The first consists of short stories about the wonderful and the unusual in cyber- 
netics. The second—of detailed drawings. Just look at them and you'll see eve- 
rything in a nut-shell. You will be amuzed, too, I hope, by the cartoons at the 
end of each story the ideas for which have been suggested by cartoonists from 
all over the world. 

The third book is the encyclopaedia from A to Z. Read it as you please: in the 
alphabetical order, or any letter you choose first; whichever way you read it 
the main concepts of cybernetics will be revealed to you. For each letter is inde- 
pendent of the rest. Combined, they tell a concerted tale of the new science. 

Only the most important “letters” of the vast “letter store” of the cybernetics 
“ABC” have been chosen for this book. It was absolutely impossible to include 
all the “letters”. 

The list of terms and objects described in the Automatics and Electronics En- 
cyclopaedia for specialists alone takes 100 pages of print, the encyclopaedia it- 
self consisting of four great volumes of 500 pages each. Even the word list for the 
projected small cybernetics dictionary (note the word “small”) fills 30 pages of 
compact text. 

The principal words in this encyclopaedia are chosen so as to enable you to go 
over its pages from the simple to the more sophisticated without destroying the 
order of cybernetic “letters”. 

Victor Pekelis 


Boe SES rs NGO ME Seis SS Bs Rg ae REL SN SOTO Ee ES RT REY PENRO oO VCS DSR DNS Pa ea 
STUDY CYBERNETICS 


Our century may be termed the century of cybernetics. Today science, techno- 
logy, industry can hardly be imagined without electronic computers, without 
automata, without new methods which science of control and regulation places 
at the disposal of man. 

The electronic machines grow in number from day to day. They are, indeed, 
indispensable tools for man’s intellectual work. They help us to cognize nature, 
to control it. Each new machine made to help man contains the thought of the 
scientist, the talent of the designer, th skill of the worker. Yesterday clever 
machines were the fabulous creation of man, today they belong to everyday rea- 
lity. No matter where youfgo—to the institute, to the factory, to the office— 
everywhere you are bound to meet machines helping man in his work, which de- 
mands not physical but mental exertions. Machines control automatic plants, 
pilot space vehicles, ontrol road traffic, carry out mathematical computations, 
make diagnoses, draw up plans, teach, account, calculate. It’s no small bur- 
den that our electronic helpers have been made to shoulder! 

It’s up to you, young men, not just to master this sophisticated technology 
but to design and build new, even more advanced machines, develop the science 
which governs them, dig into unknown strata of cyhernetic knowledge. 

Many are the wonderful and interesting exploits that await you. But they’ll 
need a lot of knowledge and skill. And to attain knowledge and skill one should 
study long and hard. 

I would like to remind you of the words of V. I. Lenin: “Study, study and 
study!” 

Wide and deep is their meaning: you should not only study, but should always be 
“on the level” of advanced knowledge, be abreast of the time, see far ahead of you. 

Only the competent are able to master science. If you want to rule over clever 
machines, to build electronic robots, to blaze new trails in cybernetics you should 
study the fundamentals of the science of cybernetics, should take hold of the 
treasures of knowledge collected for you by men of former generations, by your 
fathers and grandfathers. 


10 STUDY CYBERNETICS 


Half a century spent in the cause of science gives me the right to say some words 
to you. 

Firstly, I would wish you to study cybernetics. Look, even a small encyclo- 
paedia on cybernetics contains a wealth of treasures discovered by the intellect 
of man. How much greater are the riches of full-scale science, of its vast domains! 

So this is my advice: develop your knowledge of cybernetics. 

Secondly, I would like you to love the perfect creation of man—the electronic 
computer. These good helpers of man haven’t yet had their last word. Perhaps, 
some of you will be able to make them reveal their new possibilities heretofore 
unknown. 

So learn about the electronic computer, about its history, gain skills in electro- 
nics, dream about future electronic computers. 

My third wish is: remember, there’s top and bottom in every job. It is enti- 
cing to be able to make one leap to the top and, having once reached it, view the 
boundless expanses around you. But don’t forget: everything new, exciting, 
dazzling, if only it’s the real thing, is always deeply rooted. Therefore, the know- 
ledge of the fundamentals is an absolute must. There’s nothing so dangerous in 
science (and in technology as well) as superficiality. 

So, study fundamentals and do not forget that mathematics, information theo- 
ry, physics, electronics, metallography and many other sciences are the building 
stones of which the foundation of the building of modern knowledge, modern 
technology has been built. 

And lastly. Every job profits from enthusiasm, from purposefulness, from the 
ability to sort out the principal. Can these be attained without love for the sub- 
ject, without fidelity to it? 

Time will pass, and, may be, you will remember the “letter” of this cyberne- 
tics encyclopaedia which prompted you to enter full-scale science or the world 
of exciting technology. 

A happy journey to you all, cybernetic scientists, programmists, operators 


to be. All the best to you! 
A. BERG, 


Member of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 
Hero of Socialist Labour, 

Chairman of the Scientific Council 

for the Complex Problem of Cybernetics 

of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR. 


A 


ALGORITHM 


A rule defining the content 
and sequence of operations 
for solving a recurrent 


mathematical problem. 


Rules for All 


An air of excitement filled the 
Italian town of Bologna on the 12th 
of February, 1535, with mathemati- 
cians, nimble number experts and 
lovers of contests of all kinds flock- 
ing to it from all over Italy and 
even some other countries of Medie- 
val Europe. The occasion was the 
opening of a mathematical tourna- 
ment, one of the features of which 
was, it had been announced, a chal- 
lenge by a mathematician by the 
name of Fiore to compete with him 
in the art of solving cubic equations. 
The one who solved the greater num- 
ber of problems put forward by the 
other would be declared the winner. 

Fiore’s challenge was accepted by 
one Niccolo Tartaglia, an obscure 
teacher of mathematics. He won the 
contest, having solved all the 30 
problems offered him by Fiore—who 
was unable to solve a single one of 
Tartaglia’s! 

How was Niccolo Tartaglia able 
to gain such a_ brilliant victory, 
which left none in doubt as to who 
was the better man? The answer to 
this question is to be found in events 
that preceded the tournament. 

Ten years or so earlier Scipio del 
Ferro, professor of mathematics at 
the university of Bologna, had died. 
Shortly before his death he had dis- 
covered a general method of solving 
an extremely difficult problem, thus 
crowning the work of many years. 
The only person he had informed of 
this had been Anabello della Nove, 
his son-in-law and successor at the 
university. By some devious ways, 


11 


12 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


however, the secret reached Fiore. 
With a rule for solving a problem 
which had defied the Arabs, Greeks, 
and scholars of Medieval Europe in 
his hands, Fiore decided that he 
could challenge the mathematicians 


fore the contest he learned that Fiore 
was in possession of the late Scipio 
Ferro’s method. Undaunted, Tartag- 
lia got down to work and within those 
few days came up with a better meth- 
od which enabled him to triumph 


however, the secret reached Fiore. 
With a rule for solving a problem 
which had defied the Arabs, Greeks, 
and scholars of Medieval Europe in 
his hands, Fiore decided that he 
could challenge the mathematicians 

His hopes, however, were dashed 
when Tartaglia responded to his chal- 
lenge. Tartaglia, a mathematical ge- 
nius, was confident that he would 
easily beat Fiore, but ten days be- 


brilliantly at the contest. 

Tartaglia’s algorithm, later per- 
fected by the Italian mathematician 
Girolamo Cardano, survives to this 
day as a general solution of cubic 
equations. 


So what is an algorithm? What is this universal too! for solving problems? 


The simplest mathematical operation is addition. It can be carried out without 
any understanding of how it works, simply by obeying certain rules best exemp- 
lified by the use of the abacus: 

“Move to the right the number of beads corresponding to the number of units 
of the first figure. Then move to the right the number of beads equal to the num- 
ber of units of the second figure. Count the total number of beads for the re- 
quisite sum.” 

Using these rules a first-former at school can add one-digit numbers with the 
help of an abacus. Only in mathematics instead of “rule” they say “algorithm”. 
If a problem is likened to a lock, then the algorithm for its solution is the key. 

Algorithms are needed to solve diverse problems. Mathematics cannot get 
along without a technology of its own—a technology of problem-solving. 


A flowsheet is compiled for every part to be manufactured. 


OPERATION SHEET FOR MACHINING PART No. 138 
MACHINE CUTTING ATTACHK- MEASURING CUT-OFF. 


Facing tool Collet 
T t lat - 
EL Face end urre he No. 71159 Slide F—18 Snap-gauge 19 


nee 


ALGORITHM 13 


6a24+174.2 
m .-22:58 oe b 
VK 


A computation sheet is compiled for every problem to be solved. 


The solution of the most difficult problem can be broken down into a number 
of simple operations, a sequence of elementary steps. They are described by an 
algorithm. 

Thus, an algorithm is a precise instruction for solving a class of problems by 
means of a series of simple operations. In other words, it is a manual for problem- 
solving. It can be drawn up as a series of concise instructions to be carried out 
exactly and to the dot. An algorithm is a faithful guide that shows the road to 
be followed to solve a problem. 

A good example is Euclid’s Algorithm for determining the greatest common 
divisor of any two numbers a and b. It consists of five instructions: 

One. Inspect the two numbers @ and }. Proceed to next instruction. 

Two. Compare the numbers (a equals b, or a is less than b, or a is greater than 
b). Proceed to next instruction: 

Three. If a equals b, this number is the greatest common divisor. If a is not 
equal to b, proceed to next instruction. 

Four. If @ is smaller than b, change their places. Proceed to next instruction. 

Five. Subtract b from a. Inspect the subtrahend and the remainder. Proceed 
to instruction two. 

Thus, after carrying out all the instructions, one must return to the second, 
then the third, fourth, and so on, until the numbers are equal. Then the job is 
done. Try and find the greatest common divisor of, say, 24 and 14, using these 
instructions. 


Speaking of algorithms brings to One mathematician was asked whe- 


mind a joke probably thought up by ther he could cook a soup, to which 
mathematicians. he responded: 


14 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


“First I must formulate the pro- 
blem. Given: a pot, a gas cooker, a 
quart of water and a package of de- 
hydrated soup. Required: to cook the 
soup. The problem can be solved by 
means of a certain algorithm z: pour 
the water into the pot; place the pot 
on the cooker; light the gas. When 
the water boils, add the dehydrated 
soup; ten minutes later turn off the 
gas.” 

“What if the pot is already on 
the cooker?” 

“This introduces a complication, 
but the problem remains solvable. 
In this case the algorithm z, must 
be carried out: switch off the gas, 
remove the pot from the cooker; pour 
out the water. The new problem has 
thus been reduced to the old one, 
which I know how to solve. Hence, the 
new one can be solved, and | can 
cook the soup even if the pot is al- 
ready warming on the fire.” 

You may well ask whether it’s 
worth wasting one’s time on such a 
cumbersome set of instructions to de- 
termine the greatest common divisor 
of two simple numbers. Perhaps not. 
But there are other, more complex 
problems, and solving them requires 
knowledge of an appropriate algo- 
rithm and how to use it. 

As a guide to action every algorithm 
must meet certain requirements. Thus, 
it must be applicable not for the so- 
lution of just one problem, but of 
all problems of a given type. Its 
use as a guide to action would be 
just about nill if it could be used 
only for one pair of numbers such as 
21 and 14. 

Discovering and formulating an al- 
gorithm requires extensive knowledge 
and much hard creative work. But 
when the algorithm has been found 


and the problem’s solution broken 
down into an ordered sequence of 
precisely defined operations, all that 
remains is to faithfully carry out the 
instructions. Anyone can do this wor- 
king almost mechanically. 


Mechanically? But if that’s the 
case, can’t the work be entrusted to 
a machine? 


It can, and electronic computers 
are the answer. Nowadays scientists 
have learned to automate the solu- 
tion of any problem for which an 
algorithm exists. 

The long history of mathematics 
is essentially a quest for algorithms. 
Every new algorithm means new so- 
lutions of problems. The simpler and 
shorter an algorithm, the shorter is 
the road to the solution of the mathe- 
matical mysteries concealed behind 
many-tiered formulae and _ equa- 
tions. 

The elaboration of algorithms spe- 
cifically suited for problem-solving 
by machine is of primary importance 
in our computer age. Algorithms are 
of prime importance in computer ma- 
thematics—in fact, they are compu- 
ter mathematics. 

The greater the advances of com- 
puter mathematics and the more wi- 
despread the use of computers in all 
spheres of life the more important is 
the task of discovering algorithms for 
solving large series of problems. With 
such an algorithm a computer can be 
programmed so that it can solve any 
or all of the problems of the series, 
as the case may require. The impor- 
tance of comprehensive algorithms is 
enhanced by the fact that computers 
calculate very swiftly and in time 
will work even faster. It is better 
to discover a general method of sol- 


ALGORITHM 15 


ving a large number of similar pro- solution for every problem, to be 
blems, leaving the actual calculations calculated with or without a compu- 
to computers, than to work out a ter. 


Extracting the root 


16 AUTOMATICS 


A branch of science 

and technology that deals 

with the theory 

and construction 

of control systems capable of function- 


ing without participation of man. 


“Sense Organs” and “Muscles” 


In our time a person is plunged 
into a world of automatics, of self- 
operating gadgets and devices of every 
size and description as soon as he 
wakes up in the morning. The alarm 
clock that woke him is one such auto- 
matic device. The water with which 
he washes is piped to the bathroom 


by an automatically operating water- 
works, and its temperature in the 
hot-water tap is automatically con- 
trolled by a thermostat. The food 
for his breakfast was preserved fresh 
by an automatic refrigerator. The 
bread for his toast was baked at an 
automatic bakery. After breakfast he 
reaches the ground from his tenth- 
floor flat in an automatic elevator. 
On the way to work he obeys the 
signals of automatic traffic lights. 
And so on, ad infinitum. 

Modern technology, our whole way 
of life would have been impossible 
without automatics. We would never 
have been able to launch rockets 
into outer space, fly airplanes or 
descend in submarines to the ocean 
deeps. Iron and steel works, chemi- 
cal plants, power stations and mines 
as we know them today would stand 
idle. 


Men have endowed automatic systems with almost limitless capabilities. To 
begin with, they have provided them with “sense organs”—sensors which regis- 
ter changes in physical or chemical state and transmit their findings to the auto- 
matic device. 

A limit switch (7) “feels” a workpiece and when the piece is finished stops 
the machine tool. A photoelectric cell (2) Jights a river buoy when it gets dark. 
A sound sensor will slide open the doors of a fire department at the sound of a 
siren. There are sensors to indicate when the concentration of noxious gases in 
a mine approaches the dangerous level. There are “taste” sensors which control 
solution concentrations and signal if an acid or other chemical has to be added. 
There are also sensors which register position relative to the force of gravity (4) 
and ensure stability at rest and in motion. Other sensors determine temperature 
or pressure (3) with high accuracy, “see” invisible infrared, ultraviolet, roent- 
gen or cosmic rays. Still others measure the intensity of electromagnetic fields, 
the concentration of ions, the slightest motion of the air, the impact of dust mo- 
tes, the motion of electrons and many other things to which the human senses of 
sight, hearing, touch, taste, smell are insensitive. They are capable of penetra- 
ting virtually everywhere to relay signals carrying precise information about how 
a machine is functioning or how a complex technological process is proceeding. 


AUTOMATICS 


17 


Different kinds of sensors: (2) a limit switch, (2) an automatic “eye”, (3) a pressure gauge, 
(4) an attitude sensor. 


Sensors are elements of primary importance in all automatic systems. They 
are being steadily perfected and made evermore sensitive so that they can pick 
up the weakest signals. But then, these signals may be so weak that the devices 
are incapable of reacting to them. 

So the next element in most automatic systems is the amplifier or booster, 
of which there are many types: electronic (2), magnetic (2), hydraulic, pneumatic, 
pneumoelectric, electromechanical (3). Common to them all, irrespective of de- 
sign is their purpose of transforming weak input signals into strong output sig- 
nals. All amplifiers, as a rule, are capable of handling energies many times in 
excess of the control energy. Some amplifiers, electronic, for instance, are more 
sensitive, others are more reliable—magnetic, for example. 

Amplifiers of different types may be coupled to operate together, say an electro- 
nic amplifier picks up a very weak signal, amplifies it somewhat and feeds it into 
an electromechanical amplifier, which converts it into a very strong signal indeed. 

One note on terminology before proceeding further with some of the basic prin- 
ciples of automatics: the output circuit of a sensor or amplifier is known as the 
control circuit. It governs, regulates or controls the controlled circuit. 

Often a smooth input signal is required to produce a trigger-action response 
in the controlled circuit. This is achieved with the help of relays. They can be of 
different types: mechanical, electronic, electromechanical, photoelectric, etc. 
For instance, when you drop a coin into a public telephone what you are doing 
is switching on the telephone line by means of a gravitational mechanical relay. 

An important characteristic of any relay is its so-called response time: the 
time it takes to produce a change in the circuit it controls. The slowest are mecha- 
nical relays, with speeds of tenths of a second. Electromechanical relays are fas- 


2—616 


18 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Amplifiers: (7) electronic, (2) magnetic, (3) electromechanical. 


ter, operating at around 1/300th of a second, while electronic relays function at 
fantastic speed of millionths of a second. 

It takes a weak current to trigger a relay, but the relay can be made to switch 
on a circuit through which a strong current passes. In this respect it is akin to 
an amplifier. Conversely, amplifiers can be made to operate relay-like, that is 
effecting stepped changes of some parameter instead of altering it smoothly. 

Thus, if sensors can be compared with the sense organs of a living organism, 


Relays: (Z) electromagnetic, (2) electronic. 


AUTOMATICS 19 


amplifiers and relays can be likened to 
its nerve knots or ganglia. 

Two more important “building blocks” 
of automatics are effectors and actua- 
tors—the “muscles” of automatics. Their 
role can best be shown by discussing 
some of the jobs of automatics. Essen- . 
tially, they all fall within four catego- m\\ 
ries: inspection, safety, regulation and § ~ N 
control. 

A vast number of devices have been 
built for the purpose of checking the di- 
mensions and quality of workpieces, the 
temperature and pressure of processes, 
voltages and currents, the colour of fab- 
rics, the concentration of solutions and 
the quantity of output. Besides, they 
perform a thousand and one other opera- 
tions involving inspection, verification A simple automatic quality-checking de- 
and sorting. Mechanical, electrical, elect- vice. 
romechanical and a host of other devices 
have been designed and built for these purposes. Most widespread nowadays are 
electric and electronic instruments, because they are fast, compact and flexible 
in operation. 

A bearing plant manufactures millions of steel balls. It would take years to 
sort them out by hand. A simple device with a chute with two holes init, a latch and 
a suitable receptacle is capable of sorting several thousand balls per hour. Those 
of the required size drop through one hole, rejects roll into the spoilage bin. 

An electronic thickness gauge operates with high precision and, in addition, 
counts the standard items and rejects, removes the rejects from the conveyer and 
signalizes its findings. In selecting the type of device to be employed, engineers 
take into account the required operation speed and accuracy, the complexity 
of the system, its cost and many other factors. 

The simplest automatic safety device is a safety fuse which blows when a short 
circuit or overload occurs in your home, breaking the circuit and forestalling the 
possibility of a fire starting. Similar but much more powerful and sophisticated 
circuit breakers are installed on high-voltage transmission lines to keep trans- 
formers, generators and other electrical installations from breaking down in the 
event of a short circuit. 

One clever device keeps the shafts of generators, compressors or pumps from 
spinning too fast. An automatic gadget protects a forging press operator from 
injury if he is careless. Turbines, boilers, engines, airplane systems, generators, 
power transmission lines, chemical installations, electric motors—all require 
automatic safety devices of different kinds. Without them the whole of modern 
industry and technology—factories, power plants, transport facilities, household 
appliances, every mechanical tool and system—would literally grind to a halt. 


Q* 


20 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Safety fuses 


Generator 


7) 
. 
® 
E 
=] 
D 
c 
fo) 

O 


Automatic protection devices: electromechanical (left) and electrical. 


The third “profession” of automatics, regulation, is also of tremendous impor- 
tance in engineering. In most technological processes and in many machines 
the main thing is to maintain a certain parameter or state—temperature, pressure, 
humidity, speed, chemical composition, voltage, etc.—at a preset level. 

This is done by regulators, governors and controllers of different kinds. A clas- 
sical example is the centrifugal governor that is used to maintain a constant 


An automatic voltage regulator. 


tj ‘Ny 
fZp VMEEMMIEBEEAEMEE 11) -R_y_—— Wbbarraararasisstitty 


ASSESSES SS ASA 9 


% 
; 
Y 
Y 
Y 
4, 
“, 
, 
4, 
4, 
f 
Y 
Lao 
y 
y 
y 
Y 
Y 
“, 
4 
; 
¥ 


csssss 


pe SSE OLB PPEP LEI f//; CLL, Y Lh) v/ 4 
4 OE C2 


AUTOMATICS 


Feedback 


ll 
% \ 
A \ox 
©, El! B 


jit! 


IY 


Wy 44 
f ir 
f 
y/ 
! 


| 


| 
y 


l 


(Sag 


I 


Comparison unit Amplifier Electric motor Actuator 


A tracking system automatically turns a telescope, keeping it locked on a star. 


rotation speed. A more sophisticated device is the automatic voltage regulator 
housed in a little black box under the bonnet of every car. An automobile gene- 
rator is driven by the engine whose speed varies over a wide range. Without the 
regulator the generator would not recharge the storage battery at low speeds 
while at high speeds the voltage would soar, damaging the electrical equipment. 

Today, automatic industrial installations predominantly employ electronic 
regulators. In these devices the controlled parameter is expressed in terms of 
electric current of corresponding voltage. The current is amplified and compared 
in a measuring unit with the voltage of the programming unit. The required 
adjustment is fed into the amplifier and from there to the effector unit. 

A new device for regulating the temperature of overheated steam in a high- 
pressure boiler at a thermal electric station has considerably reduced the response 
time and cut fluctuation by half, keeping the temperature steady to a high degree 
of accuracy. 

Finally, the fourth “profession” of automatics is control. Its importance can 
be shown on the example of the operation of a heavy-duty rolling mill—a giant 
machine for making rails, beams, strip metal and other rolled stock driven by 
dozens of dozens of electric motors with a tota] power of tens of thousands of kilo- 
watts. The operation of all its motors, big and small, must be coordinated with 
split-second precision. Some five thousand switchings of the motors must be 
performed in the course of a single run of the rolling mill. This is done by the 
automatic control system. 

Offshoots of automatic regulation and control are tracer control and tracking. 
Tracer control is employed in automatic copying machines, tracking systems 
are used to keep telescopes locked on to a certain star for continuous observation, 
and various combinations of the two are built into electronic simulators. 


24 


22 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The crowning achievement of au- 
tomatics is, beyond doubt, space 
technology, in which scientific and 
technological advances have been most 
spectacular. 

On view in the Cosmos pavillion 
of Moscow’s permanent Economic 
Achievement Exhibition is one of the 
wonders of automatics, an authentic 
spaceship with its glittering array 
of sophisticated gadgetry designed to 
provide suitable living and working 
conditions for men in the harsh envi- 
ronment of outer space. 

Looking at the craft, it is hard 
to imagine that it embodies such a 
remarkable degree of organization 
and coordination of countless sen- 
sors, amplifiers, relays, actuators and 
effectors that the system, in the words 
of scientist-cosmonaut Konstantin Fe- 
oktistov, approximates a highly or- 
ganized living creature with “sense 
organs”, “nerves”, “muscles”, “limbs” 
and, of course, functions admi- 
rably suited for life in outer 
space. 

The instrument systems receive and 
process a tremendous amount of in- 
formation about the environment, the 
ship’s position, the condition and 
actions of the crew, to which they 
respond by issuing control commands. 
Its automatics 

register loading and vibration; 

check the safety factor of structu- 
res, back-up equipment and energy 
reserves; 

check the functioning of all systems 
and units; 

measure temperature, solar and cos- 
mic radiation, meteor streams; 

check the airtightness and thermal 
insulation of modules; 

control the attitude -correction sys- 
tems and rocket stages; 


provide power, water and oxygen 
supplies; 

maintain the required temperature 
and gas composition in the crew’s 
quarters; 

carry out flight corrections during 
launching, orbital flight and descent; 

regulate on-board power supply; 

and, last but not least, coordinate 
and control the whole complex of 
automatic systems continually busy 
picking up, measuring, indicating, re- 
cording, reading out, comparing, sto- 
ring and retrieving the vast amount 
of information needed to ensure the 
spaceship’s safety on all stages of 
its flight and to carry out all the 
planned investigations. 

Add to this that the remote con- 
trols are remote indeed, for vehicles 
orbiting the Earth or flying farther 
out to the Moon and beyond, com- 
mand and response signals, must span 
vast distances. This work is the fun- 
ction of telemechanics, a first cou- 
sin of automatics. One of the more 
popular telemechanical devices is the 
common dial telephone. When you 
dial a number what you are in fact 
doing is switching on an automatic 
system that connects you with the 
telephone you need on the other end 
of the line. 

An example of the heights auto- 
matics and telemechanics have achie- 
ved is one of the technological mirac- 
les of our age: the automatic docking 
of two Earth satellites in space, an 
outstanding accomplishment of So- 
viet technology. 

Millions of people were able to 
see the docking procedure on their 
television screens. What, regretfully, 
they could not see was the workings 
of the sophisticated cosmic cybernetic 
systems that guided the two satelli- 


AUTOMATICS 23 


A technological miracle of our age: automatic docking of two Earth satellites in space. 


tes circling the Earth at eight kilo- 
metres per second towards each other 
and locked them together. 

Of the two vehicles, one is “active”, 
the other is “passive”. Both are pro- 
vided with “sense organs” enabling 
them to “see”, “hear” and “recogni- 
ze” each other. Their antennas emit 
a steady stream of homing signals. 
When the active vehicle picks up the 
signal it approaches the passive one, 
which is beaming back response 
signals. 

As soon as the radio link is estab- 
lished the automatic homing system 
measures the relative orbital parame- 


ters of the two vehicles and feeds 
the relevant data into the active 
one’s attitude control system. Gra- 
dually the active vehicle aligns pro- 
perly with the passive one and draws 
slowly closer. When they are 300 
metres apart the low-thrust docking 
motors fire, nosing the active vehicle 
up to the passive module’s docking 
collar. The two touch, triggering the 
circuit of the latching system, which 
clamps them tightly together. 

After a while, on command from 
the Earth, the two vehicles separate 
and are brought back to Earth indi- 
vidually. 


Lost some sensors again? 


24 AUTOMATIZATION 


The stage of machine industry 
at which man is freed 

of responsibility 

for the direct control 

of production and this function 
is transferred to automatic 
devices. 


The Only Way 


Have you ever stopped to wonder 
how many different things are turned 
out throughout the country every day? 
Lots, of course. Billions, perhaps? 
Or more? ; 

Consider several examples taken 
from different fields. 

Soviet factories produce more than 
a million cogwheels a day. Even if 
each is not more than 10 millimetres 
thick, stacked one on top of another 
they would rise above Mt. Everest, 
the world’s highest mountain. 

An automatic screw machine turns 
out a hundred screws per minu- 
te. 

An automatic bottle-making ma- 
chine produces more than 6,000 bott- 
les an hour. 


Red October, the Moscow choco- 
late firm, makes 3,500 sweets a mi- 
nute. 

The city’s meat-packing plants 
make 125,000 meat cutlets cvery 
hour. 

A single automatic bakery bakes 
30,000 loaves of bread a day—and 
Moscow has a dozen of them which 
turn out an assorted range of breads 
and other baked products. 

Clothing factories daily sew mil- 
lions of garments. 

Could one imagine millions and 
hundreds of millions of different ne- 
cessary and useful things all being 
made by hand? Of course, not. They 
are made by machines, and not just 
machines, but automatic ones. 

Countless automatic devices (besides 
those that manufacture material, tan- 
gible things) and sophisticated gadgets 
control the operation of machines and 
look after production processes. 

The introduction of this great arse- 
nal of automatic machines and devi- 
ces, means of control and regulation 
into industry is what we call auto- 
matization. 

How does a worker operate a con- 
ventional machine tool? He feeds the 
material to it, or inserts the pieces, 
and removes the finished product. He 
watches the machine’s operation, de- 
cides whether it is up to standard, 
controls and adjusts it as the need 
arises. 


These pictures illustrate how man gradually freed himself of the functions of direct control: 
(1) originally the operator had to provide the power to drive his machine tool; (2) then he in- 
vented power drives of different kinds; (3) later he added a tool holder; (4) automatic tracer- 
controlled machines have freed man of direct control functions altogether; (5) at an automatic 
factory the whole production takes place without direct participation of man. 


SUMSIIPUSLMAEL SEAL 


MERU. 
Sus eusseeuuUuNS 


26 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


With automatization all this is done 
by machines. Moreover, automatic 
machines which perform different ope- 
rations constituting a sequence are 
integrated into production lines, with 
automatic handling of the workpieces 
between operations so that a human 
hand never touches them. 

When it is time for automatization, 
what are the considerations that fa- 
vour it? 

One we know: mass production. It 
is always much easier to make ten 
identical objects than ten different 
ones, for the simple reason that they 
involve the same operations, the same 
dimensions, the same sequences. And 
what if not tens, but tens of thousands 
and millions are needed? Uniformity 
of output is one of the main conside- 
rations in favour of automation. 

There is another. 

Very often, and not only in aca- 
demic laboratories but in factory shops 
as well, it is necessary to measure, 
regulate and control parameters lying 
beyond the threshold of human sense 
organs. Indeed, can man detect elec- 
tric field intensity or radiation? Of 


course, not. This has to be done by 
automatic devices. Thus, whenever 
human sense organs are incapable of 
accurately determining a required pa- 
rameter or quantity or where human 
reaction is too slow to spot a change 
in a production sequence an auto- 
matic device is a must. 

And there is a third consideration. 
Many industries are harmful to man. 
At chemical plants producing sulphu- 
ric acid, textile dyes or fertilizers 
some operations present health hazards 
and some intermediate products may 
be toxic or explosive. It is here that 
automatic machines are indispensable. 

Cybernetics plays a tremendous 
part in the automatization of pro- 
duction processes. It enters automa- 
tization not only in the form of in- 
dustrial electronic computers but also 
in the form of instruments that do 
not catch the eye but are, in fact, 
extremely sophisticated. 

We shall attempt to examine how 
two very different devices used in the 
automation of certain technological 
processes function. This is the domain 
of industrial cybernetics. 


First, let us see how an “artificial memory” is used in automatizution. 


Imagine a machine that unwinds a roll of metal strip and cuts it into sheets 
of a specified size and thickness. The strip varies in thickness and must therefore 
be measured continuously, while the cut sheets have to be graded and sorted 
accordingly. This may not sound very difficult, but the job is complicated by the 
sheets having to be stacked in different bunkers according to thickness. So what 
is needed is a device which not only measures the thickness of the sheets but also 
opens the hatches of the respective bunkers where they are to be stored—and 
this must be done in precisely the time it takes for a sheet to travel from the point 
where it was measured to the bunker in which it is to be deposited. 

To automate the process the roller conveyer along which the metal sheets are 
drawn is hooked up with a magnetic drum on which recordings can be made in 
the same way as on a tape recorder. The drum is provided with a recording head, 
an erase head and as many pick-up heads as there are bunkers in the machine. 


AUTOMATIZATION 


Roller conveyer Steel sheet 


1st bunker 2nd bunker 3rd bunker 


Thickness 
gauge 


Encoding element Decoding Decoding Decoding 
element element element 


Recording head 


Erasing head 


Magnetic drum 


An automatic device for measuring the thickness of steel sheets, sorting and depositing them 
into different bunkers. 


A gauge continuously measures the thickness of the metal strip. Its readings 
are converted into an electric signal which is duly encoded and recorded on the 
magnetic drum which revolves in step with the roller conveyer. The recording 
on the drum approaches the first pick-up head at precisely the same moment 
as the corresponding sheet approaches the first bunker. If the sheet passes on, 
it will approach the second bunker just as the recording on the drum reaches the 
second pick-up head, and so on. 

Each pick-up head is connected with a decoding unit which responds to only 
one signal: the one corresponding to the sheet thickness for the given bunker. 
When the signal matches, the device opens the bunker hatch, and the sheet sli- 
des in. 


27 


28 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Scales 


Computer 


Schematic diagram of an automatic device for weighing loaves. 


Another example is one of the possible ways of automating the process of cut- 
ting dough for baking bread. 

Every baked loaf must be of the same weight. But the density of the dough 
varies, and pieces of the same size may be of different weight. The simplest thing, 
it would appear, is to automatically weigh every baked loaf and control the dough 
cutter accordingly. This approach, however, overlooks the fact that a baked loaf 
must necessarily be weighed quite some time after the chunk of dough that went 
into its making was cut. 

In other words, the cutter should be controlled not according to the weight of 
every individual loaf but according to information averaged over a large number 
of loaves. Thus even such an apparently simple job involves the use of not-so- 
simple statistics. 

The automatic system must be provided with a special computer. As each loaf 
is automatically weighed the figures are fed into the computer, which keeps up 
a running computation, controlling the work of the dough cutter accordingly. 


The mechanisms described above step forward from automatic machi- 


were examples of automation of se- 
parate processes. In recent years these 
ideas have been increasingly expan- 
ded into concepts of what could be 
called integrated and full-scale auto- 
mation. 

Integrated automation represents a 


nes to the automatic transfer of ma- 
terials and pieces from one machine 
to another within a shop or a section 
of a shop. 

Full-scale automation envisages a 
system of automatic machines and 
measuring, handling, transfer and con- 


trol units and devices which turn 
out an item or product from start 
to finish without direct human par- 
ticipation. 

The difficulties involved in such 
an enterprise are enormous, what 
with the volume of material that 
must be handled and machined, the 
number of technological operations 
that must be carried out, the amount 
of information that must be received 
and processed. 

Yet such an automated giant has 
been designed at the Automobile In- 
dustry Technological Research Insti- 
tute in cooperation with the Likha- 
choy Motor Works in Moscow. Their 
system involves a computer centre to 
which is fed all pertinent informa- 
tion about the manufacturing pro- 
cesses going on in the different shops, 
about the movement of workpieces 
from shop to shop and_ section to 
section, about the functioning of the 
machines and transfer lines. Each 
shop has its own operational control 
unit where all the elements of the 
production process are continuously 
controlled, from the stocks of work- 
pieces and tools to the rate of flow 
of finished items to the next shop. 

The tasks of the factory computer 
centre also include scheduling of pro- 
duction plans for every shop and 
section and continuous inventory con- 
trol. 

This automation system has _ pro- 
ved its worth, and similar systems 
have been installed at the Moscow 
Compact Car Works, the Zavolzhsky 
Engine Works, the Yaroslavl Engine 
Works and other factories. 

Automation of production yields 
an enormous growth in labour pro- 
ductivity. This goes without saying. 
But can automation be of any use 


AUTOMATIZATION 


to management and administration? 
The answer is an emphatic yes. 

In fact, nowaday it is impossible to 
imagine the economy being run with- 
out automatization. Why? If only 
because in our country some years 
ago there were three million per- 
sons employed in the accounting ser- 
vices alone. A total of 10 million 
people are employed in administra- 
tion and management. Ten million 


economists, planners, rate-setters, 
bookkeepers, accountants, design- 
ers! 


And the scale of the economy and 
the rates of development are expan- 
ding with each passing year. The 
flow of information—plans, progress 
reports, technical specifications, bills, 
invoices, and what have you—de- 
mands that it be processed in the 
shortest possible time. 

The rise in the number of administ- 
rative and managerial personnel could 
well lead to a situation in which 
half the nation was employed in 
management, with a corresponding 
reduction in the number of people 
directly engaged in production. Hen- 
ce, what is needed is not greater 
numbers but a qualitative leap. This 
is being achieved by the automati- 
zation of managerial processes. 

Let us try and define the tasks of 
managerial activity. Normally these 
are the production, transmission, sto- 
rage and processing of information. 
In other words, it is the job of kee- 
ping track of production, quality 
control, drawing up production spe- 
cifications, duplicating and dispat- 
ching documents, coordination of va- 
rious production sections, registra- 
tion and sorting out of documents, 
computer work—quite a job, in 
short. 


29 


30 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


So one can imagine the amount of performed every year. That is why 
information that must be handled in in our time management and admi- 
running such a gigantic enterprise as nistration are well nigh impossible 
the national economy of a _ whole without electronic computers. 
country. Tens and hundreds of bil- Hence, automatization is the Watch- 
lions of computer operations must be word. 


Oat 


AUTOMATON 


A machine incorporating 
a system of mechanisms 
and devices (electronic, 


electric, pneumatic, hydraulic) 
capable of receiving, 
converting, transmitting 

and utilizing energy, 

material or information 
without direct human 
participation. 


“Auto” Does It Itself 


An automatic machine tool at work 
is a fascinating sight. Operating com- 
pletely on its own, it clamps the 
workpiece in place, positions the cut- 
ting tool, machines the work to pro- 
per shape and dimensions and remo- 
ves the finished part. In short, it 
performs all the operations a human 
operative would have carried out— 
but much faster, with greater pre- 
cision and efficiency. How does the 
machine know just what to do? 

The answer to this question takes 
us far back in time. 

It is said that there once lived a 
Byzantine emperor who sat on_ his 
gilded throne in the shade of a gol- 
den tree with golden branches and 
golden leaves with golden birds among 
them. Two lions of pure gold on both 
sides of the throne watched appro- 
aching visitors. But it was not this 
glittering splendour that struck pe- 
ople most. For as a person approach- 


ed the throne the golden birds sang 
and the golden lions roared thunde- 
rously. Not surprisingly, the awe- 
struck visitor fell to his knees and 
bowed his head to the ground. And 
when he lifted his eyes—lo and be- 
hold!—the throne and emperor were 
gone, lifted to on high, from whence 
the emperor gazed imperiously down 
at the prostrate visitor. 

All these wonders—the singing 
birds, the roaring lions, the vanishing 
throne—were put into motion by hid- 
den mechanisms of ingenious auto- 
matic devices. 


Farther back in time, Heron of 
Alexandria, the ancient Greek mathe- 
matician and mechanic, left a des- 
cription of an automatic theatre in 
which automata enacted several sce- 
nes suggested by the Jliad. 


In the first scene the Greeks could 
be seen repairing their ships, sawing, 
hacking, drilling, hammering nails. 
When the doors of the stage opened 
on the next scene the Greeks were 
shown dragging their ships down to 
the sea. In the following scene the 
ships sailed over calm seas accom- 
panied by dolphins diving in and 
out of the water. Then a_ tempest 
arose, the waves mounted higher and 
higher, and the ships huddled to- 
gether for safety. In the forth scene 
Nauplius and Athena appeared on the 
stage. Nauplius held up a torch which 
lighted up in his hand. In the fifth 
scene the Greek ships sank into the 
sea, and Ajax, the sole survivor, 
swam for his life. Finally came a 
lightning bolt, a roar of thunder, and 
Ajax vanished. Athena vanished too. 

The whole action was performed 
by automata; after each scene the 


32 


CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


stage doors closed automatically, the 
scenery changed, and the doors ope- 
ned again. 

In the following two thousand years 
ingenious mechanics designed and bu- 
ilt clever automatic toys, mostly for 
no better purpose than the enjoyment 
of the rich. 

However, there was much more to 
them, if only because the mechani- 
cal wonders of the past indicated the 
road along which automatic systems 
were later to develop. They were 
based on the achievements of techno- 
logy of their time, the age of energy 
of running water, wind or compressed 
springs. 

Springs were used to drive intri- 
cate systems of cogwheels, levers, 
connecting rods, cams, wormscrews 
and other parts of automata. That is 
why it can be said that spring-dri- 
ven mechanical toys were built on 
the clock principle. 

According to Karl Marx, clocks 
and watches, which rank among man’s 
best technological creations and were 
the first automatic systems built for 
practical purposes, suggested men the 
idea of introducing automata in 
industrial manufacture. It is not ac- 
cidental that the Frenchman Jac- 
ques Vaucanson, celebrated maker of 
mechanical toys, was the one who 
built a weaving loom which served 
as a prototype for the automatic 
loom designed by Antoine Jacquard. 

Vaucanson’s machine replaced fifty 
weavers. Less than twenty years later 
automatic looms were introduced at 
many silk mills in France and Eng- 
land. Other industries were quick to 
follow suit. Bigger, better and more 
sophisticated machines were introdu- 
ced in metal-working, mining and 
other fields. 


Of major importance was the in- 
vention of the automatic lathe scale. 
The Russian mechanic Andrei Nartov 
and then the Englishman Henry 
Maudslay made the cutter move au- 
tomatically along the workpiece, 
which could now be machined with- 
out having to be directly handled 
by the operator. 

The shrill cry of whistles heralded 
the advent of steam and the steam 
engine, which replaced draught ani- 
mals—horses, oxen, mules, asses—as 
a convenient source of energy. 

But the age of steam would not 
have come if the demands of the 
time had not driven the talented 
Russian mechanic Ivan Polzunov to 
devise a float-type controller for his 
“fire engine” so that “water, fire and 
steam could sustain themselves in 
motion”. Steam engines would hardly 
have ever found such universal ap- 
plication as they once enjoyed if 
technological advance had not led 
the English inventor James Watt to 
the invention of the centrifugal speed 
governor. 

Man became stronger than ever 
before. The new machines were qui- 
ckly put to work and made to per- 
form a wide range of jobs. 

The governors and regulators used 
in the first steam engines proved to 
be extremely versatile. They were 
adapted for use in many different 
kinds of mechanisms. Gradually, with 
the advent of the age of electricity 
with its high power, speeds and high 
precision, automation spread to all 
technological spheres. It became the 
mainstream of technological advance. 

Engineers classify the vast variety 
of automatic systems in use today ac- 
cording to their purpose, designation 
or sphere of application as technolo- 


AUTOMATON 33 


gical, transport, military, computer be classified, irrespective of their pur- 

automatics, and so on. pose, according to their data-handling 
Lately, with the development of characteristics. 

cybernetics, automata have come to What does this mean? 


Let’s see how an automatic system works, a bolt-making tool, for example. 


With a quick motion a lever pushes out a brass rod from which a bolt is to be 
machined to just the required length. A turn of the holder and the blank is brought 
up to the cutting tool. A golden shaving curls away from the blank. Within se- 
conds it is machined along the whole length. The cutting tool retreats, the hol- 
der is turned again and new tools cut the thread, champfer, finish the head. A few 
seconds more and another cutter cuts the finished bolt from the rod. Witha slight 
clank it drops into the metal bunker on top of a pile of other identical bolts whi- 
le the machine is already busy making another one. 

Despite the tremendous variety of modern automata, they all share in common 
a peculiar superficial trait: they all create an impression of intelligently per- 
forming their jobs, going about them quite independently and on their own, 
without any outside interference. 

Well, you may say, this is, after all, a superficial impression. But what makes 
an automatic system so independent, sophisticated in its performance and self- 
contained in its behaviour? 

One of the primary features of an automatic system is its data-handling cha- 
racteristics. 

Whatever an automaton does its performance is controlled by a programme 
prepared well in advance. In a metal-cutting tool, for example, automatic con- 


This is how an automatic machine tool functions. 


Automatic 
positioning and 
removal of ‘\ 


workpieces 1 a | 


3-616 


34 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


trol can be achieved with the help of a 
tracer device which “feels” all the curves 
and hollows of a master model and feeds 
the necessary instructions to the cutting 
tool for machining the workpiece. 

An automatic film projector, on the 
other hand, is controlled simply by the 


celluloid strip passing through the film 
channel. 


An operation programme can be fed 
into an automaton by means of patterns 
of holes punched in cards or tape, a nag- 
netic tape-recording or any other arran- 
gement for recording and transmitting 


\} a certain set of instructions. 
Anybody who has ever received a soft 
drink, a package of cigarettes, a news- 


paper or whatever else from a vending 

An automaton with an open-circuit contro! machine or passed through a turnpike has 

system. held the simplest programme for its ope- 

ration in his fingers: the coin he inserted 

in the slot. The data contained in any programme must travel along a certain 

route, as shown by the heavy black lines in the three diagrams. In the case 

of an automatic vending machine the information travels along a simple open- 
circuit system from input to output. 

More complex automata require additional data inputs in the course of their 

operation, such as information about temperature, dimensions or voltage. This 


An automaton with a closed-loop control system. 


Programme 


1d T pam OLUTUUUHL 


t =e 


Measurement R¢y 


AUTOMATON 35 


A 


NN, » 5 


t 
= 
TA 


SESS NUTT 2 iy 


Con = I 
. Ce“ YY) 


“* 
fe 


ni 


LALLA LLL a LLL 
ee 
ay We 
system 


i 
the 
CILLA LLL 


This automatic system is capable of self-regulation to meet the working requirements in the 
course of operation. 


involves what is known as closed-loop, feedback, control system with two data 
input routes. 

The age of cybernetics has seen the appearance of third-generation automata 
capable of memorizing past performance and experience, analysing previous 
and current operation and working out an optimum programme which can be 
changed and adjusted in operation to meet changing conditions. The principle 
of operation of such systems is shown schematically in the drawing given 
above. 

The ultimate purpose of the operation—the expected output—is defined in 
the programme originally fed into the system. The relevant information is carried 
along the first data route. The second data route carries the working programme 
issued by the working memory block which controls the system’s operation. 
3* 


36 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The third data route, as the diagram shows, carries the information fed back 


from the measurement block. 


There are automatic systems with a greater number of data routes for carrying 
relevant information, and their performance capacity is, of course, correspondingly 


greater. 


The world of automata is great 
indeed, and it is continuously expan- 
ding. This, understandably, has cal- 
led for the creation of a comprehen- 
sive scientific theory to define the 
laws according to which it functions. 

This theory rests on the firm foun- 
dation of the old classical theory of 
automatic control. Now it is called 
upon, however, to solve numerous 
problems of extreme complexity nee- 
ded to design and build reliably 
functioning automatic systems. 


Automation theory must, for exam- 
ple, show how to determine the sta- 
bility of systems so as to prevent 
deviations in operation. It must in- 
vestigate the sensitivity of automata 
since the properties of a control sy- 
stem vary in the course of operation. 
There are many other complex pro- 
blems which the theory of automatic 
control attacks and solves, thereby 
promoting the advance of automation. 


BINARY SYSTEM 
OF NOTATION 


A positional notation system 
for representing numbers 


in which the base is 2. 


Only Zeros and Ones 


When man first learned to count 
he, quite naturally, used his fingers 
to tick off the numbers one by one. 
They restricted him to ten, of course, 
and the decimal system of counting, 
as it later came to be called, proved 
so convenient that it has lasted to 
this day. 

Decimal notation is the cornerstone 
of one of the three R’s, and learning 
it is one of our first tasks at school. 
We learn the basic digital values 
from O to 9 and are later taught that 
every number in decimal counting 
is written as a linear combination 
of powers of ten. Not surprisingly, 
the system seems to us the simplest 
and most convenient of all possible 
systems of numerical notation. 

This view was shared, among oth- 
ers, by the famous French scientist 
Blaise Pascal, who built the first 
calculating machine. His calculator 
employed so-called figure-wheels or 
counting wheels with 10 teeth aro- 
und the rim. Since then many gene- 
rations of calculating machines of 
different types have been built to 
replace manual doing of sums with 
mechanical digital manipulation. All 
these machines were decimal, and 
when electromechanical calculators 
were built they, too, were made to 
operate in the decimal system. 

The first electronic computers were 
also based on the ten digits of the 
decimal system, the digits being re- 
presented by flip-flop switches. The 
American ENIAC computer, for exam- 
ple, was decimal. But it required so 
much costly hardware that designers 


37 


BINARY SYSTEM OF NOTATION 39 


Now take the binary number 1111. The first numeral at the extreme right is 1. 
The next position is only two times the first, hence it represents 2; the third po- 
sition is two times the second, and it represents 4; and the fourth position is, 
accordingly, 8. 

Let us try to represent, say, the number 1017 in the binary system. For this, 
as in decimal notation, we count off the positions. We start with the lowest, 7. 
The number 7 comprises four plus two plus one: 7=4-+-2-+-1. This can be written 
down as follows: 1X2?-+-1x2!+1x2°. Accordingly, in each of the positions 
we write down a 1, which gives 111. 

The next number is ten, which is made up of eight plus two, viz., 10=8--2— 
=128+0 x 2?+1x2!+0x2°. You see that there are no ones or fours, and ac- 
cordingly we write down zeros, obtaining 1010. 

Continuing the operation of reducing decimal to binary, we can write down 
the number 1017 as 512+256+128+64+32+16+8+141=1 291 «28+ 1x 2?- 
1x 28--4 X25-+4 x 24-1 x 23+-0 x 2?-+0 x 2!-++-1 x 2°. Expressing each position of 
a number correspondingly in terms of 0 or 1, we obtain the binary for 1017, viz., 
11114111001. 

You may wonder, of course, how one can perform the basic arithmetical opera- 
tions with such unwieldy numbers. 

The rules are essentially the same as in the decimal system, though with some 
peculiarities due to the fact that binary notation is based on only two digital 
values. 

Thus, the rule for carrying out binary calculations can be stated as follows: 

“As in binary notation there are only two numerals to denote the coefficients 
of corresponding powers of 2, in any position 1 added to 1 yields 0, with 1 carried 
to the next position to the left. When a column of 1’s is added, the coefficients 0) 
and 1 alternate, with 1 being carried to the left for each change to 0.” 

Let us carry out a simple addition operation according to these rules, namely, 
1-+-1. In binary we have: 

, 0001 
T0001 


0010 


Now let us add 8+3 in binary: 


4000 
0011 


1014 


Tables have been compiled for basic arithmetical operations: 


Addition Multiplication 
0+0=0 0x0=0 
O+1=1 Ox1=0 
1+0=1 4152 O10 


14+1=10 1xi=1 


38 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


began to look for ways of reducing 
the number of switches. 

The engineers and mathematicians 
who tackled the job proceeded from 
the two-state—binary—nature of the 
basic elements of computer hardware. 

Take, for example, a neon lamp. 
It can only be in one of two states: 
it is either “open”, and conducts 
electricity, or it is “closed”, and 
carries no current. The _ flip-flop 
switch, as its very name implies, 
can also be only in one of two stable 
states. Memory elements, too, are 
binary. 

So why not employ the binary sys- 
tem of numerical notation, which 
uses only two numerals O and 1, 
making it extremely suitable for elect- 
ronic machine operation. 

Accordingly, new machines were 
built to perform their calculating 
operations with only zeros and ones. 

Not that binary notation is a con- 
temporary of electronic computers. 
In fact, people had been dabbling 
in binary notation from as far back 
as the latter part of the 16th century 
to as recently as the beginning of 
the 19th century. 

The celebrated Gottfried Wilhelm 
Leibnitz considered the binary sys- 
tem simple, convenient and beauti- 
ful. “In dyadic computation”, he 
declared, “the rewards for its pro- 
lixity are new discoveries of funda- 
mental value to science.... Remar- 
kable order is achieved by the reduc- 


A look at binarv notation. 


tion of all numbers to the simplest 
elements of O and 1.” 

At Leibnitz’s request a medal was 
struck to honour the “dyadic system”, 
as it was then called. It depicted a 
table of numbers and simple opera- 
tions with them. Around the iim 
ran the inscription: “Unity can suf- 
fice to derive all from minuteness.” 

Subsequently the binary system 
was all but forgotten and for almost 
200 years hardly a work dealt with 
the subject. It was only in 1931 that 
several possible practical applications 
of binary notation were suggested. 

Like decimal counting, the binary 
system obeys rigid laws. But in the 
former each place of a number cor- 
responds to a power of ten, while in 
the latter it corresponds to a power 
of two. Accordingly, in decimal no- 
tation there are ten digits from 0 
to 9, while in binary there are only 
two, O and 1. 

Numbers in binary notation at first 
seem queer indeed to the unaccusto- 
med eye, as suggested by such a 
brief biographical statement: 

“At school he was extremely cle- 
ver with numbers. Problems which 
his schoolmates solved in half an 
hour took him no more than 101 or 
110 (5 or 6) minutes to solve. Thanks 
to his wits and his energy he finish- 
ed his college course in 11 (3) years, 
and he was only 1,010,000 (20) when 
he was placed in charge of aresearch 
laboratory.” 


It can be seen from the table on p. 40 that the smaller the number of digits 
available to designate each digit position in a positional notation system the 
greater the number of positions needed to represent a given number. Take, for 
example, the number 8 in the decimal system. In the binary system, it takes 


four positions to represent it: 1000. 


40 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


—— ee ee  — OOO OOOCO OS 


_—_— = ONO 00-—-—" Ss —- OOOO 
OO] = O00 = = OO &gt; oo 


0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0) 
0 
0 
Q 
0 
1 
| 
1 
1 
1 
1 


APWNM—DHOYHMARwWNY-oO 


Comparison of number recording in unitary, binary and decimal systems. 


Mathematicians claim that the arithmetical operations are much simpler in 
the binary than in the decimal system. Even extracting a square root is simpler. 
If you practise for a while in binary arithmetic you will surely agree with them. 
There is one stickler, though: subtraction is performed by means of addition. 
This is done by adding the complement of the subtrahend (i.e. the number that 
complements it to the next order of magnitude) to the minuend. 

Suppose we want to subtract 101 from 10011 (19—5). First, add two 0’s to 
the left side of the subtrahend to obtain the same number of digits as in the mi- 
nuend. The complement of 00101 to 100000 is 11011. Adding this to the minu- 
end, we obtain: 


10044 
+ 44014 


101110 


BINARY SYSTEM OF NOTATION 4i 


Discarding the 1 on the extreme left, we obtain 01110, i.e. 14. And, as we know, 
in decimal notation 19—5=14. 
Multiplication is reduced to writing down the multiplicand in a staggered 
column and then adding up the column. Thus, 
41014 
* “4104 
41041 
11011 
11044 


101011111 


Division is achieved by a process of consecutive subtraction, replaced, as we 
know, by addition. 

As you see, all mathematical operations in binary are reduced to the simp- 
lest arithmetical operation of addition. 


Thus, we now know the advantages 


they are not intimidated by the long, 
of the binary system, which at first 


dreary rows and columns of zeros and 


glance seems so strange because of 
our decimal tradition. It only re- 
mains to state the system’s draw- 
back: the binary system is used only 
in computers, only they reign un- 
disputed in its domain. To be sure, 


me 


Dy 


ones that obey the tedious rules of 
binary arithmetic. Machines race 
through endless ranks of zeros and uni- 
ties with incredible speed and easily 
overcome this shortcoming of the bi- 
nary system. 


BIONICS 


A science that treats 

of the utilization 

of biological processes 

and methods in solving 
engineering problems. 

Bionics can also be defined 
as a science that investigates 
methods of creating 
mechanical systems 

with characteristics approaching 
those of living organisms. 


Living Nature as a Designer of 
Hardware 


Do you know that 
. A rattlesnake can detect a tem- 
perature difference of one-thousandth 
of a degree? 

... Some fishes can sense a one- 
hundred-thousand-millionth part of 
scent in a litre of water? This is 
equivalent to detecting the presence 
of 30 grams of such a substance in 
the whole Aral Sea. 

... Rats feel radiation? 

... Some species of microbes react 
to very slight changes in radiation? 

... A common cockroach sees ra- 
diation? 

... A stinging mosquito exerts a 
pressure of up to 1000 million kilo- 
grams per square centimetre? By com- 
parison, a 16-kilogram weight with a 
4-square-centimetre base exerts a 
pressure of 4 kilograms per square 
centimetre. 


... Deep-sea fishes can detect a 
change in electric current of less than 
one-hundred-thousand-millionth of an 
ampere? 

... The Nile fish mormyrus steers 
its way with the help of electro- 
magnetic oscillations? 

A remarkable list, isn’t it? And it 
could be continued on and on with 
no less remarkable examples. It is 
hardly surprising that as they got to 
know all this, men were tempted 
with the idea of re-creating some of 
nature’s achievements. 


Here we must make a brief histo- 
rical digression. 

The human race has been around 
for about one hundred thousand years. 

What did the first man see? Rush- 
ing waters, flying birds, running 
animals, blowing winds. In the early 
stages of man’s creative life it was 
only natural for him to learn from 
nature. Animals, fish, birds suggested 
ways and means of tackling the “en- 
gineering problems” facing him. 

And the modern man? 

Having surrounded himself with 
numerous intricate machines in a 
world of high speeds he has again 
turned to nature for guidance. Why? 
Because he still sees the superiority 
of many of nature’s creations over 
his own. Because the materials, de- 
vices and technological processes of 
nature are more complex than any- 
thing known to science. 

It was man’s desire to learn from 
nature that gave birth to the new 
science of bionics. 


Bionics derives its name from the 
Greek word “bios”, which means “life 
cell”. And it studies biological sys- 
tems and processes with the aim of 


applying the knowledge acquired for 
solving engineering problems. 

Among the results of bionic re- 
search were the remarkable items cited 
at the beginning of the chapter. Such 
careful, exacting, refined observation 
is extremely important to science and 
technology, to teach them how to 
build inanimate things like living 
entities. 

Have you ever reflected that the 
more complex a structure the less 
its stability? Most probably, yes. 
Nor does one have to go far for exam- 
ples. It is obvious to anyone that 
it is simpler to build a one-storey 
house than, say, the Atomium that 
was one of the central attractions of 
the Brussels World Fair. One will 
also hardly dispute that a_ single 
brick in a building is more stable 
than the whole gigantic building 
built of countless bricks. 

And in living nature? An organism 
as a whole is more stable than any 
one of its “bricks” taken alone. That 
is one of the secrets of survival of 
living systems. What is the explana- 
tion? As yet scientists do not know. 
But now bionics is increasingly and 
ever more successfully attacking that 
old invincible bastion—the unit of 
life—from every side. 

The objective in this consorted at- 
tack is not thoughtless imitation, 
not copying of all the characteristics 
of biological entities, but a critical, 
strict selection of technologically use- 
ful properties. Proceeding from a bio- 
logical “prototype” bionics elabor- 
ates models for concrete practical ap- 


The nerve cell—neuron—is quite unlike its 
man-made counterparts—tiny electronic de- 
vices that simulate some of its simplest 
functions. 


BIONICS 


Nucleus 


Dendrites 4 


Cel! body 


Axon 


Sinapse 


Signal 
to commence 


self-excitation 


Signal 
Signal to halt 


self-excitation 


43 


44 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


plication. It is interesting and useful 
to simulate only those functions, the 
specialists say, which enhance the 
flexibility, reliability, efficiency of 
a system or a process. 

The nervous system has long been 
recognized as the most complex bio- 
logical system capable of performing 
an extremely wide range of seemingly 
unlike functions of control and data 
processing. All through the history 
of biology as a science researchers 
have been probing the nervous sy- 


stem from every conceivable aspect. 
As a result they discovered that it 
owes many of its features to the stru- 
ctural peculiarities of nervous cells, 
or neurons, as they are called. 
Why shouldn't bionics try to create 
a technical control system which 
would model the nervous system? 
What is needed for this? First of 
all—to simulate its fundamental 
“building block”, the neuron. Such neu- 
ron models were instrumental in es- 
tablishing many interesting points. 


This is a schematic representation of a neuron and its electronic model. 


In a living organism a neuron is usually in one of two states: quiescent (inhi- 
bition) or excited (excitation). Experts say that in simplified terms these neuron 
functions can be compared to a two-position electronic element operating in an 
“on-off” regime. It can be an electron tube, relay, transistor. 

From neurons extend nerves, the “wiring” of the body which links its organs 
and various sections into an integrated whole and also connects the organism 
with the environment. 

Both the living neuron and its electronic model are so-called threshold elements, 
which means that they “turn on” or “trigger” only when the input signal exceeds 


Visual perception: the frog’s eye perceiving the object takes in its various qualitative features 
separately: contours, curvature, brightness. 


Image-forming nerve 
centre in the brain 


Image on the 


Four types 
of nerve fibres 


Brightness 


BIONICS 


a certain level, the threshold. The process involves accumulation and build-up 
of signals in time and in space. The number of signals a neuron can receive may 
vary over a wide range from only a few to several thousand. 

The simulated neuron has told researchers many things. To begin with, the 
engineer in building a control system wil! like to have the flexibility, reliability 
and efficiency of a neuron. But, on the other hand, an engineering system has 
no use for such a property of the neuron as its need fer a relatively prolonged 
“rest period” to “restore its strength”. A technological system does not need it, 


and this is its advantage. 


What practical results has biorics 
yielded, what are its contributions 
to technology? 

Bionics experts are amazed, for 
example, at the remarkable naviga- 
tional abilities of birds. A common 
carrier pigeon, for example, returns 
home from practically any place. It 
has been shown that the unassuming 
little bird golden plover can cross 
the Atlantic from New Scotland to 
South America (a distance of some 
4000 kilometres) without a single 


stop-over. And every year they fol- 
low the same routes. 

How do they take their bearings 
in space? How do they find their 
invisible routes in the sky? What 
are the highly accurate and sensitive 
“navigational instruments” that fun- 
ction inside these champion naviga- 
tors? 

So far scientists are unable to ex- 
plain how this highly sophisticated 
orientation system operates. Howe- 
ver, we are entitled to expect that 


Electronic model of a frog’s eye—one of the first bionic circuits. 


d rey 
shobsher teh ee boenge bes 


‘ ss a ode getnted 


Us) 


46 


CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


the question will not remain unans- 
wered. This is confirmed by the ini- 
tial results of some extremely inte- 
resting experiments being conducted 
with birds. 

On the other hand, the remarkable 
ability of bats to find their way about 
the darkest caves or flit among tree 
branches on moonless nights is no 
longer a secret to bionics experts. 
They know that the apparently ran- 
dom, helter-skelter flitting of a bat 
out foraging for food is in fact an 
extremely accurate method of sonar 
(sound navigation and range finding), 
enabling the animal to measure the 
distance to its prey with utmost 
precision. When hunting, bats are 
extremely “sarulous” “shooting” 
bursts of ultrasonic radiation at in- 
sects and picking up the reflected 
waves. 

The study of sonar techniques of 
animals, notably bats, has been use- 
ful in investigating the direction- 
finding system blind people develop 
in themselves. It has been found 
that a blind man can use the sound 
of his voice to take his bearings, 
find his way without the help of a 
stick and even distinguish wood, me- 
tal or fabrics “by ear”. 

For many years bionics experts 
have been studying the speed with 
which various prairie animals, birds, 
insects, fish and marine animals tra- 
vel. As is known, man has long 
since surpassed the speed records of 
the blue shark, which can swim at 


70 km per hour, and the most 
fleetfooted grasshoppers which leap 
at speeds of 10 to 60 km _ per 
hour. 


It’s the problems of manoeuvrabi- 
lity and flexible steering which birds, 
fishes and insects handle automati- 


cally with the greatest of ease, which 
interest the transport engineers. 

Japanese engineers and biologists 
established after many experiments 
that whales had a better shape than 
the best-designed modern ship, and 
used their newly found knowledge to 
build a “whale-like” vessel. The ad- 
vantages of the new design were rea- 
dily apparent: with the same speed 
and load capacity as its conventional 
equivalent it required only  three- 
quarters of the engine power. 

Bionics principles have been incor- 
porated in the design of the “Pen- 
guin” Soviet snowmobile. Its name 
is fully justified. How does a pen- 
guin travel over soft snow? Sliding 
on its belly and propelling itself 
with its flippers much like a skier 
uses sticks. The mechanical Penguin 
also slides on its belly, pushing off 
with spoked wheels. Weighing 1300 
kilograms, the machine can travel at 
90 km per hour. 

Bionics is helping chemists. Orga- 
nic chemists studying and creating 
polymer materials are interested in 
the “technologies” employed by na- 
ture in producing complex chemical 
compounds. 

The symbol of bionics is a crossed 
scalpel, soldering iron and an inte- 
gral sign. This alliance of biologist, 
technician and mathematician offers 
hope that the science of bionics will 
prove capable of penetrating where 
none have penetrated before and of 
discovering what none has ever seen 
before. 

The time is not far off when the 
advances of bionics will cause many 
remarkable changes in the field of 
technology. We can look forward to 
new breakthroughs in methods and 
tools for detecting and extracting mi- 


nerals and manufacturing materials. 
In engineering, control systems will 
incorporate what could be called bio- 
logical machines. 

Looking farther ahead, scientists 
predict the advent of the age of bio- 
nies. Its contours can be surmised 
from the first advances of this dis- 
cipline. One book describing the new 
science declares that in the future, 
following the example of living na- 
ture, men will design and build orni- 
thopters, fast submarine liners, vehic- 
les for negotiating the rugged terrains 
of the Moon, Mars, Venus and other 
planets, sparkling cities of dendroid 
dwellings and communities of fabu- 


BIONICS 


lous beauty on the sea bottom. Men will 
learn to orientate as freely in outer 
space as birds do in the air, to fore- 
cast the weather, earthquakes and 
volcanic eruptions, to literally grow 
various electronic devices, remarkab- 
le biomechanisms and artificial neu- 
rons, to build protein computers.... 
The book envisages direct transfor- 
mation of sunlight into clothes and 
food along the lines of photosynthesis 
that takes place in every green leaf.... 
Artificial muscles instead of cumber- 
some machines.... Aircraft, machines, 
automobiles, rockets guided by will- 
power alone, without steering wheels 
or levers.... 


47 


48 BLACK BOX 


RESTLESS EES a 


An object of investigation 
whose internal structure 


is ignored or unknown. 


A Thing in Itself 


It is hard to overestimate the im- 
portance of the “black box” concept 
in cybernetics. It is not often that 
the name of a concept conveys its 
meaning and content so aptly and at 
the same time picturesquely as that 
of “black box”. In fact, it is one of 
its basic concepts. 

Fundamental for the “black box” 
are the concepts of its “input” and 
“output”. “Input” is the combination 
of all possible influences (physical, 
chemical, etc.) to which the “box” 
is subjected. “Output” is the reac- 
tion of the “box” to these influences 
in terms of some observable values. 
The “black boxes” we usually deal 
with are not “absolutely black”—we 
know what kind of influences (out of 
infinite number of possible combina- 
tions) they should be subjected to, 
and what results to expect. 

Man encounters “black box” prob- 
lems literally from his first steps in 
life. To be sure, in life he generally 
copes with them successfully, without 
attempting to classify the problem or 
even knowing that he is, in fact, 
dealing with a typical black box. 


As soon as a child pulls itself to 
its feet and starts walking about its 
crib, it experiences the urge to get 
out into the “big world”. But there 
is the net that doesn’t let him out. 
To the child the net is a typical “black 
box”: he knows nothing about its 
structure, how it is fastened. He pulls 
it at random here and there. In the 
language of cybernetics, what he is 
doing is manipulating the input leads 
in the hope of producing a result at 
the output end: the lowering of the 
net. 

A clockwork toy is also a black 
box. Children don’t know how it 
works, All they know is that it runs 
when you turn the key. We can say 
that at the input end there is the key 
which should be turned, at the out- 
put end there is the running of the 
wheels. 

A TV or wireless set is a black 
box to the owner who knows nothing 
of how it works, except that he must 
apply electric current at the input in 
order to obtain image and/or sound 
at the output. 

It is no exaggeration to say that 
every thing, every object, every phe- 
nomenon, in fact every knowable 
thing is initially a “black box”. 

In the examples cited the “boxes” 
don’t remain “black” for long. As 
experience builds up the “blackness” 
gradually disperses. 

But is it always as simple as all 
that? Let us take some other examp- 
les. “Black boxes” are fairly common 
in electronics, sometimes in the quite 
literal sense. 

An engineer stands in front of an 
electronic apparatus. He cannot disas- 
semble it. But he must decide whe- 


ther it should be returned for repairs 
or simply thrown out. 

A similar task confronts a telephone 
engineer whose installations are out 
of order but cannot be disassembled 
without good reason. 

Or take a physician, who in his 
practice is confronted with only the 
external manifestations of a disease 
and knows nothing of the actual state 
of the patient’s organism. He has 
before him a “black-box” problem. 

Specialists studying “black-box” 
theory claim that its application can 
be useful in coping with the tremen- 
dous diversity of problems involved 
in industrial planning. For even an 
enterprise with only ten production 
processes has a choice of almost ten 
million different plans. 

As you see, the “black box” is a 
problem of electrical engineering and 


BLACK BOX 49 


electronics, of automatic control, me- 
dicine and economics, and the list 
could be continued. True, the Eng- 
lish scientist Walter Ashby, who in- 
vestigated the “black box” concept, 
declares that the purpose of his theo- 
ry is merely to investigate the rela- 
tionship between the experimenter 
and the environment with special 
attention to the flow of information. 

Thus, we know that a “black box” 
is a system of the internal structure 
of which we are ignorant. How then 
can it be discussed, studied, investi- 
gated? The “black box” method in- 
vestigates a system from only one 
aspect: the relationship or connection 
between its input and output. The 
purpose is to comprehend the system’s 
behaviour. Only its behaviour: struc- 
ture and material are not taken into 
account. 


William Ashby describes “black box” investigations as followsi 


A person cannot enter the same stream twice; similarly, he cannot perform 
the same experiment twice. All he can do is to perform another experiment dif- 
fering from the first in elements which can, by general agreement, be ignored. 

The same is true of “black box” investigation. The basic data about the ob- 
served states of different parts of the “box” (its “input” and “output”) are tabula- 
ted in chronological order. Thus, suppose you are studying a “box” that has 
fallen from an unidentified flying object. You could write down: 


Time (hours) State 
11.18 Did nothing—box emitted steady buzzing noise at 240 hertz 
frequency 
11.19 Pushed button marked “K”—buzzing rose to 480 hertz and 
continued at that level 
11.20 Accidentally pushed button marked “!”’—temperature of the 


box rose by 20°C 


Thus, every system is investigated by chronologically tabulating the observed 
sequences of the states of the “input” and “output”. The record tells what input 
leads the experimenter manipulated with and what happened as a result at the 
“output”. By gradually expanding the “input”-“output” scope the experimenter 
gets to know the behaviour of the object. And as he gets to know more and more of 
its behaviour he attempts to reveal the inner connections of the “box”, its stru- 
cture. 


4—616 


50 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


# 
a 
= 


penne 
aay. 


ANNAN 


This is a “black box”. By repeatedly pres the buttons the lamps on top can be made to 


flash on in different combinations, ma 


ing it possible to establish the laws of “input”-“out- 


put” relationships without knowing what goes on inside the box. 


Ashby notes on this score that the experimenter is like an engineer sitting in 
a ship’s deck-house in front of an array of levers and telegraph systems with which 
he manipulates the machines observing the results of this manipulation as rea- 


dings on a row of dials. 


The explanations about what a 
“black box” is were sufficiently long 
and sufficiently convincing. What they 
have failed to reveal, however, 
is why the “black box” is one of 
the fundamental concepts of cyberne- 
tics. The answer is: because in cyber- 
netics people deal with systems which 
cannot be described in detail, very 
big systems, as they are commonly 
called. 

Let us try and see what this means. 
Once again some examples will be 
helpful. 

Here is one: the human nervous 
system. It is like a huge electric 
circuit, like that of an electronic 
apparatus. But the difference is tre- 
mendous, the quantitative differen- 
ces are beyond all comparison. A ra- 


dio device incorporates several hund- 
red different kinds of switches. An 
electronic machine has as many as 
100 000 switching elements. But the 
number of neurons in the human 
brain is of the order of 14 000 mil- 
lion. 

Imagine a biologist who has un- 
dertaken to establish all the swit- 
chings that take place in a thought 
process. Let us assume further that 
the biologist can master the swit- 
ching circuit of the nervous system 
just as fast as a radio engineer mas- 
ters the circuit of a radio device. 
It is known from experience that a 
good specialist needs five hours to 
analyse a circuit of 200 switchings. 
Let us assume that a biologist ana- 
lyses the switching circuit of the 


human nervous system with the same 
speed. A simple calculation shows 
that this would take 40 000 years! 
Detailed investigation of a very big 
system is impossible. 

Another example. Automation is 
being carried out at a chemical works 
in shops where health hazards are 
present. For a while everything is in 
order: the operator pushes the neces- 
sary buttons, the automatic machi- 
nes function flawlessly, the processes 
run normally. But here is a hitch: 
the operator is human and it is dan- 
gerous for him to be in the shop! 
He, too, has to be replaced and his 
duties handed over to an automatic 
device. 

In the dry language of cybernetics 
this problem is defined as “the need 
to replace one system by another, 
similarly functioning one”. 

This is where the “black box” 
comes in. We know that some as yet 
undesigned system must perform the 
functions of the human operator. We 
ignore how a human being performs 
his actions, concentrating only on 
what he does (input) and what comes 
out of it (output). We regard the 
human operator as a “black box” and 
build its model. The important thing 
is that both the box and its electro- 
nic replica can be described by the 
same mathematical formulae. 

Here, as you can see, we again have 
a very big system. Such systems may 
be so complex that even when comp- 
lete information concerning the state 
of individual elements is available, 
the number of elements is so great 
that it is very hard to synthesize 
this information, to bring it toge- 
ther, so as to judge of the behaviour 
of the whole system. A human inves- 
tigator is incapable of coping with 


4° 


BLACK BOX 


it, he is swamped by the incoming 
information and cannot grasp it 
all. 

What is the conclusion? There are 
several. One of them is vividly sta- 
ted by the cybernetician Ashby. If an 
engineer building a bridge had to 
consider every atom of the building 
materials his job would be imprac- 
tical, if only because of its scope. 
Therefore, a builder ignores the fact 
that beams and panels are made up 
of atoms. He considers them as in- 
divisible units, because their nature 
allows of such a simplification, and 
the engineer’s task becomes imple- 
mentable. 

But are simplifications always pos- 
sible? Not by a long shot. 

A psychiatrist trying to determine 
what is going on in a disordered 
brain has to deal with a very big 
system. Moreover, this is a system 
which demands a very cautious ap- 
proach to simplifications. They are 
not always permissible and can gros- 
sly distort the overall picture of the 
disease. 

When an economist engages in his 
complex calculations at an enterprise, 
the raw materials prices, manpower 
requirements, finished goods prices, 
expenditure of labour, demand and 
other indices are buried in an ocean 
of minor things which must be taken 
into account. He must approach sim- 
plifications with the utmost care, and 
weigh them in his calculations with 
the greatest precision. Such examples 
are literally countless. 

Therefore, the “black box” is indis- 
pensable in studying very big sys- 
tems. It is the magic key of a practi- 
cal method which can be employed 
for controlling the enormous diversity 
of very big systems. 


By 


52 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


In such cases a complex system is 
represented as a “black box”. Then a 
simplified model is built and its in- 
vestigation commences. Next the be- 
haviour of the system and of its mo- 
del is compared and analysed. 

If the model doesn’t behave like 
the system, the experimenter is en- 
titled to conclude that the principles 
incorporated in the model are at 
variance with those of the system. 
Hence, a new hypothesis about the 
system’s structure is required, and 
new experiments must be carried out. 

Finally, the lengthy investigations 
yield success. The principles on which 
the model was built tally with the 
hypothesized principles of the sys- 
tem confirming the experimenter’s 
initial conclusions. 

Let us see how such theoretical 
reasoning bodies forth in practice on 
the initial stages of the work of the 
Central Automation Laboratory in 
creating reliable automatic steel-ma- 
king equipment. 

Today steel is produced mainly in 
two ways: in open-hearth furnaces 
and in Bessemer converters. The open- 
hearth furnace has earned affection 
and respect of the steel-maker, but 
the converter.... The converter de- 
mands truly creative skill on the 
part of him. Unlike the open-hearth 
method, in which he is assisted by 
precise laboratory analyses, Bessemer 
steel is produced largely by rule of 
thumb. Converter operators are like 


"Why are you doing badly 
at schoo! ?” 


huntsmen aiming at difficult targets. 
Even the experienced hit the bull’s 
eye with difficulty, and the best 
register only 40 per cent direct “hits”. 

So the cyberneticians decided to 
represent the converter as a “black 
box”. The “input” is the initial 
charge for the melt, the “output” is 
the finished steel. What goes on in- 
side the “box” is for the time being 
neglected. The next thing is to write 
a series of simultaneous equations 
describing the heat balance, the 
required carbon and oxygen, their 
amounts before and after the melt. The 
equations tell what is needed for the 
best “input” to obtain the best “out- 
put”. Today producing Bessemer steel 
is no longer a question of “shooting 
in the dark”. The process is carried 
out according to a calculated method, 
and the percentage of precision “hits” 
has almost doubled. 

To what conclusion have we ar- 
rived as a result of our acquaintance 
with the problem of very big systems 
and the “black box”? After due re- 
flection we can, evidently, agree with 
the cyberneticians’ view that the 
discoveries of science are displaying 
ever growing diversity which is push- 
ing back its frontiers and revealing 
ever more important details. At the 
same time, as a result of the disco- 
veries of science, wide classes of phe- 
nomena are being reduced to an ever 
smaller class of principles of more 
and more general nature. 


"What have you got in 
that head of yours?” 


Cc 


CALCULATING HARDWARE 


Machines and devices 
for speeding up calculation 
procedures through partial 


or total automation. 


From Plum Stones to Computers 


A foreigner visiting Russia some 
400 years ago during the reign of 
Ivan the Terrible noticed that scribes 
in government offices had little bags 
containing plum and cherry stones. 
In his diary he wrote down: “In the 
land of Russians counting is done 
with the aid of plum stones.” 

The history of counting devices is 
thousands of years old. The first 
“calculator” was provided by nature 
herself: the human hand, “the ten 
fingers with which men learned to 
count, that is, perform the first arith- 
metical operation”, as Engels wrote. 
It is not accidental that the first 
numerals from O to 9 are called 
digits, which means fingers. 

The earliest calculating device was 
the abacus, which evolved through a 
series of types, many of which are on 
view in museums, notably at the 
Hermitage Museum in Leningrad. Two 
shallow boxes hinged together open 
up like a book. An exquisite richly 
ornamented casket made of ivory pie- 
ces joined by silver pins and locked 
with a silver hook is actually an old 
Russian counting board. Red and 
black glass marbles serve as counters. 
A genuine work of art, it probably 
belonged to a wealthy person. But 
this doesn’t mean that only rich 
people used counting boards. Accor- 
ding to a 17th century manuscript, 
they were in wide use “for mercan- 
tile accounts, and counting and cal- 
culating weights, measures and mo- 
neys”. Also on view at the Hermi- 
tage is a counting board made of 
crude pinewood hammered together 


53 


PREHISTORY OF MODERN COMPUTERS 


Early computing 
devices 


PRIMITIVE MEANS FIRST DEVICES 


Development 


camara es See pace: 


From the history of the development of Calculating machines (pp. 54-57). 


PREHISTORY OF MODERN COMPUTERS 


Division of“duties” 


Counting wheel Punched cards : : 
in the machine 


PRINCIPLES OF OPERATION 
OF CALCULATING 
AUTOMATON 


FIRST PRINCIPLES 
OF CONTROL 


FIRST MACHINES 


Hollerith’s machine Babbage’s analytical engine 
Chebyshev’s arithmometer 


Keyboard computer Tabulating machine 


HISTORY OF MODERN COMPUTERS 


F lip-flop type 
electronic circuits Vaives Semiconductors 


BEGINNING OF THE 
DESIGN WORK ON MODERN FIRST GENERATION SECOND GENERATION 
COMPUTERS 


Development 


B 


Improvement 


fet 


HISTORY OF MODERN COMPUTERS 


n 
Ww 
cc 
Ww 
n 
ae 
= 
x 


Protein 


BIG INTEGRATED CIRCUITS BIC 
GIGANTIC INTEGRATED CIRCUITS GIC 


MACHINES OF THE 


Machines 
with 


" machines biological 
PAA" elements 


Light 


58 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


with plain nails. The use of counting 
boards was obviously widespread in 
Russia. Special instructions were even 
printed, such as “Convenient Calcula- 
tions for Use by Buyers and Sellers” 
printed in Moscow in 1682, which 
contained a table of products of whole 
numbers from 1 to 100. 

The abacus is still used in some 
countries, having hardly changed 
since ancient times. A high degree 
of skill can be attained in using the 
abacus, so much so that some accoun- 
tants can compete with a simple 
desk calculator. 


ductive forces the importance of cal- 
culation grew apace. Mechanical cal- 
culators were built. Man made them 
count faster, gradually reducing the 
degree of his own participation in the 
work. Later he added motors and 
“taught” the machines to “read”, 
“memorize” numbers and “record” 
intermediate results. 

It is only natural that in the age 
of automation calculating machines 
have also gone automatic. Nowadays 
they control and regulate the whole 
computing procedure operating at tre- 
mendous speeds. Their spheres of ap- 


With the development of the pro- plication have expanded enormously. 


Great is the arsenal of modern calculating machines, numerous are the ways 


of mechanizing calculations. From the desk calculator to the high-speed electro- 
nic computer. From the simplest planimeter to the most complex electronic ana- 
logue computer. From a small accounting office to a huge computer centre. 

All this has been placed at man’s service, enabling him to perform mathema- 
tical operations with huge numbers with great speed, accuracy and reliability, 
to solve the most complex problems of higher mathematics, to study very fast 
processes. 

Today a vast range of calculating machines of all conceivable sizes and types 
are manufactured, but they all fall into several distinct classes. 

The oldest and simplest calculating appliances gave rise to the adding machine. 
The evolution of this branch led to the appearance of all kinds of desk keyboard 
machines of the type that can be found in book-keeping departments, planning 
departments, etc. 

Another branch in calculating technology includes punched card machines. 
They employ oblong cards with holes punched in them. A complete set of such 
machines forms a computer flow line employing punched cards at all stages of 
the process. Punched card machines are capable of handling tens of thousands 
of cards per hour. 

Complete sets of punched card machines are the basic equipment of computer 
stations and bureaus. They are used at factories, offices, institutes, collective 
farms. 

Our designers are continuously striving to improve designs of punched card 
machines, supplementing and complementing them with new types and systems. 
Sorting, tabulating and multiplying systems have been built which incorporate 
electronic elements, all the efforts are aimed at expanding the data-handling 
capacity of computer flow lines and increasing their productivity. 

Another branch of computer hardware is analogue machines and systems in 


CALCULATING HARDWARE 


which mathematical quantities are rep- 
resented not as numbers, not as concrete 
data changing in discrete steps, but as 
physical quantities presented in a certain 
scale: a change in angle of turn, voltage 
or liquid level. The advantage of such 
machines is that they can operate with 
quantities fed in a continuous stream, 
like a flow of water. The replies also 
come out continuously. 

Many of you have seen devices of this 
type, the slide rule and various varia- 
tions of it, and mathematical instru- 
ments, such as planimeters, pantographs, 
tangential mechanisms, etc. 

Electronics has worked a revolution in 
this sphere too, having produced a wide 
range of electronic analogue installa- 
tions and simulators: continuous-action 
analogue computers capable of solving 
complex systems of simultaneous equa- 
tions to accuracies of several per cent. 
These machines are simple in operation, 
reliable, and require a minimum of pre- 
paratory work prior to solving a problem. 

An example of a machine of this kind 
is an electronic simulator (analogue 
computer) of the EI (electronic integra- 
tor) class. It is an impressive installation 
capable of calculating 70 to 80 variants 
needed for positioning 50 extraction and 
250 pressurization wells in a matter of Computer manufacture is soaring in the 
two or three days. Formerly it took 200 Soviet Union. 
man-months for calculators to solve the 
problem for only 100 wells. 

Another machine is the “MH-14”. The initial data are fed in automatically and 
the result is recorded by an electric typewriter. When necessary, the whole course 
of the solution can be followed on the screen of a cathode-ray tube. The machine 
is serviced by one engineer and one technician. 

Soviet industry manufactures a wide range of analogue computers. They are 
all classified into three groups: integrators, machines for solving differential 
equations, and specialized analogue compu.ers, such as the “MIIT-9”, “MH-8”, 
“MH-10”, “Integral-1”, “MH-14”, “OMCC-7”, “YCM-1”, to name but a few. 

But, of course, the “elite” of the world of electronics is the high-speed electro- 
nic computers. The first of the family appeared in the 40s, but already by 1955 
the manufacture of electronic computers was running ahead of the rest of the 


39 


60 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


manufactured goods by 546 per cent in West Germany, 505 per cent in Italy, 
and 303 per cent in Great Britain. Only three computers were built in Japan in 
1957, by 1970 their number rose to over four thousand. In 1960 there were 
some five thousand computers throughout the world. By the end of 1967 their 
number rose to forty thousand. By the end of 1975 their number in the largest 
capitalist country, the USA, is expected to reach 200 thousand, the forecast 
for 1980 being 355 thousand. 

The same situation exists in other industrial countries. In 1959 France had 
20 electronic computers, and by 1969 the number was five thousand. Japan had 
only three computers in 1957, nowadays it has thousands. 

The total number of computers in 1949 could be counted with the aid of fingers; 
by 1966 it reached 30 thousand, by 1969—75 thousand, and now it is presumed 
to go into hundreds of thousands. 

In the Soviet Union the manufacture of mathematical machines is soaring. 
Taking the production for the year 1950 as 100, five years later the figure was 
737, and only one year after that, 1171. By 1965, the output had increased 4.7- 
fold over 1956, and in 1970 it exceeded that of 1965 by 4.8 times. In the next 
seven or ten years the USSR will reach one of the first places in the world by the 
production of electronic computers. 

Several major computer families have appeared in our country. One is the 
“Ural” type, ranging from “Ural-1”, “Ural-2”, “Ural-3”, through “Ural-10” and 
on to “Ural-16”. Although belonging to the same family they serve different pur- 
poses and can solve a wide circle of mathematical and logical problems. 

Not long ago a new series of universal digital computers appeared: “Minsk”, 
“Minsk-1”, “Minsk-2” ... “Minsk-22” ... “Minsk-32”. This is a family of small 
machines designed mainly for solving scientific and engineering problems and 
also for production planning and control. The “Minsk-22” is a semiconductor 
unit intended mainly for data processing in handling economic planning pro- 
blems. What can it do? Calculate wages, keep warehouse tabs, compile balance 
sheets, process statistical data, draw up finished products specifications and do 
many other things listed in the accompanying instructions as “other economic 
problems”. Furthermore, the computer can solve simultaneous algebraic equa- 
tions and perform multiple arithmetical operations “and other mathematical 
operations involved in solving scientific and complex engineering pro- 
blems”. 

As you see, this isn’t just a machine, but an all-purpose mathematical combine, 
a jack-of-all-trades capable of performing any task. 

The “Minsk-32” is another step forward beyond its brother 22. It calculates 
five or six times faster and can handle eight times more information. Furthermore, 
it can function with 136 external appliances. It is operated by one person with 
the aid of a typewriter. 

Our review of small machines would be incomplete without the universal “Nairi” 
designed for scientific research organizations and design offices, without the 
“Promin”, asmall desk with the control console on the top and the hardware under- 
neath capable of solving engineering problems of average complexity and per- 
forming small computations. Another interesting machine is the “Setun” which is 


CALCULATING HARDWARE 61 


housed in two cabinets. Special mention should be made of the “Mir” which, in 
spite of its small size, is capable of solving many types of simultaneous equa- 
tions, linear programming problems, of calculating time-tables and of performing 
a wide range of complex mathematical operations, including analytical trans- 
formations of formulae and solving equations in letter form. 

Academician V. Glushkov, Hero of Socialist Labour, head of the team which 
built the “Mir”, lists the characteristics of his offspring as follows. It is capable 
of memorizing 12 000 symbols—six or seven pages of text. Innate to it are all 
the main formulae we were taught at school plus some items from the college 
course. Called the “electronic engineer”, it is an indispensable tool in the hands 
of specialists employing mathematics in their investigations. 

Alas, so many mathematical machines are produced in our country that it is 
impossible to tell of them all. 

Before we forget, we should note one more quality of the “Mir” family of compu- 
ters: the problems are fed into them with the help of conventional mathematical 
signs, symbols and numbers. No translation into a machine language is required, 
which is extremely convenient. 

Now let us proceed to the most important family of machines, the “generals” 
of Soviet computer hardware, the “B9CM” family. They are large installations, 
extremely reliable, fast, with a vast data-handling capacity, tremendous 
universality, and capable of solving the most complex mathematical pro- 
blems. 

The first-born of this family was the “B9CM-1” created by a team of scientists 
and engineers under Academician S. Lebedev, Hero of Socialist Labour. Origi- 
nally it was the best in Europe, capable of performing 8 000 and, after some im- 
provement, 10 000 operations per second. It also possessed an excellent memory 
with swift retrieval. 

Today this machine is a great-great-grandfather. It was replaced by a new ge- 
neration, the “B9CM-2” and “BICM-3”, capable of performing 20 000 operations 
per second and with a vast memory of four million words. 

The next generation was represented by the “BOCM-4”, awarded a diploma of 
the International Exhibition of Engineering, Administration and Management 
Mechanization held in Moscow in 1966. 

Life goes on, and we became witnesses of the creation of “BOCM-6”". This was a 
veritable giant—not in size but in capabilities. Though several times smaller 
than its great-great-grandfather, the “BOCM-1”, it performs a million operations 
per second. It is designed for solving a wide range of complex scientific, technolo- 
gical and economic problems requiring a vast amount of calculations. 

The machine incorporates all of the latest achievements of computer techno- 
logy. Its designers were awarded the 1969 State Prize. The “B9CM-6” is capable 
of carrying out several operations and solving several problems simultaneously. 
Input information can be fed to it by means of punched cards or tape, magnetic 
drums or tape, and even by telegraph. A very high-speed memory device additio- 
nally enhances the machine’s already high productivity. It can be run by several 
operators simultaneously working from several control panels, which need not 
be in the same room. 


62 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


One of the flag-ships of Soviet 
computer electronics has already as- 
sumed its duties at the head of the 
electronic machines of the sophisti- 
cated computer complex at the Joint 
Nuclear Research Institute at Dubna, 
north of Moscow. The “B9CM-6” is 
employed in solving the most diffi- 
cult mathematical problems of mo- 


dern physics, which entail the pro- 
cessing of numerous experimental da- 
ta in the shortest possible time. 

As you see, many excellent compu- 
ting machines have been created in 
this country. Their rate of production 
is such that specialists confidently 
declare: “In the near future we’ll 
move to one of the first places.” 


Computer 


CAPACITY OF MEMORY 


The amount of information 
(numbers and instructions) 

that can be simultaneously stored 
in the memory block. 


“An Impress on a Wax Surface” 


The famous philosopher of ancient 
Greece Socrates compared the pro- 
cess of memorizing an idea with the 
action of a seal-ring leaving its im- 
press on a soft wax surface. 

How deep can this trace be? What 
is the strength and the capacity of 
memory, how great can its intake be? 
In general, what’s memory? 

Some wonderful tales are told about 
our memory. In one of his lectures 
Professor V. Solodovnikov cited an 
example of six brick-layers answe- 
ring under the influence of hypnosis 
a question about the form of the crack 
in the sixteenth brick in the fifth 
row of the eastern wall of a particu- 
lar house on a particular street. And 
that after six months have lapsed 
since the wall was laid! 

The famous Russian scientist Aca- 
demician S. Chaplygin could uner- 
ringly name a telephone number he 
used only once some five years ago. 

It’s rumoured that the cashier of 
the “Gurnik” football club by name 
of Leopold Held remembers all the 
results and all the details of the 
club’s games. Once in the course of 


a televized programme the commenta- 
tor asked Held: “What was the re- 
sult of the match between ‘Gurnik’ 
and ‘Odra’ (Opole) four years ago?” 
The answer came instantly: “We won 
4:0, the game was played on the 
18th of August in the presence of 
27 000 fans. The all-round profit was 
235 thousand zlotys. Three goals 
were scored by Pol and one by Zsol- 
tiseck.” 

And yet these starting examples do 
not represent the limit of man’s abi- 
lities. 

There is the case of the reporter 
of one of Moscow’s papers by name 
of Shereshevsky, who was initially 
examined by specialists in 1926. His 
memory was practically boundless. 
He memorized rows and tables of 
over a hundred numbers, enormous 
combinations of words from texts un- 
familiar to him in an unfamiliar 
language, even ultra-long chains 
made up of two concepts “red” and 
“blue” in an arbitrary order. The 
durability of this man’s memory, 
too, was limitless. He could repeat 
unerringly a table of numbers that 
he happened to have heard once 20 
years ago. 

Professor A. Luria, who had She- 
reshevsky under observation for 30 
years, tells how he answered questions 
when examined: “He closed his eyes 
and slowly drew circles in the air 


with his finger.... ‘Wait a moment 
you wore a grey suit ... I sat 
vis-a-vis to you at the table ... got 


it!’ And not a single mistake!” 
Where is this wonderful treasure- 
store of intelligence, what are the 
mechanisms of its operation? Unhap- 
pily, we do not know it for certain, 


64 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


If we define memory as the ability 
of the brain to store information ac- 
cumulated in the past and produce 
it on request, in our century of elect- 
ricity we unwittingly tend to assume 
that memory is a combination of 
pulses travelling along a circuit in 
the same way as does electric current. 
But, alas, as yet no “memory cur- 
rents” have been found in the brain. 

The question looms large in the 
minds of scientists: how does the 
brain hold the fantastic amount of 
information accumulated by man du- 
ring his lifetime? Scientists are labou- 
ring unceasingly to solve the problem 
of the origin of memory. 

The opinion holds that our brain 
is made up of 12-14 billion neurons. 
It can be presumed that each neuron 
is capable of storing more than one 
unit of information. The presumption 
that this minute particle of the brain 
is able to assume ten or hundred 
states to record information seems 
less justified. Even if this was the 
case, it would be impossible to ima- 
gine how the brain is able to hold 
the gigantic reserve of intelligence. 
We cannot but presume that memo- 
ries are recorded on the molecular 
level, that molecules of memory are 
active in the brain. Those are enor- 
mous, very complicated molecules, 
which look like rope ladders with 
cross-beams of two types. These mo- 
_lecules, placed in a definite order, 
like the dots and dashes in the Morse 
code, constitute a peculiar atomic 
and molecular ABC. 

How much can be recorded with 
the aid of it? Let’s make some cal- 
culations. Each molecule has 10 000 
cross-beams of two types. The chro- 
mosomes of human cells contain 
some 100 000 genes. This means that 


the number of elementary signs will 
be 100 000 x10 000 —10 billion. This 
is equivalent to 50 000 pages of the 
Grand Encyclopaedia. 

But this is not the final word. 
If we go on, it will become clear to 
us that with an “ideal” code the 
text written with the aid of the two 
signs of our chromosomes would amo- 
unt to hundreds of thousands or 
even millions of encyclopaedia pages. 
And what if nature managed to pro- 
duce some special signs by making 
small shifts in the molecules? Then 
the information capacity will defy 
all imagination. That’s what can be 
done with the aid of atomic and mo- 
lecular ABC. Experiments have shown 
that not everything and not always 
is retained in man’s memory for a 
long time. Frequently information is 
kept stored in his head only “until 
tomorrow”. This leads us to suppose 
that man’s memory is of several 
types. 

Information reaching the brain con- 
nects its neurons into electric cir- 
cuits and circulates in these circuits. 
This is the short-time memory. 

The currents circulating in the neu- 
ron circuits act upon the molecules 
of the nerve cells, and this leads to 
proteins being synthesized in them. 
When the signal is repeated, the pro- 
tein reacts to it and admits infor- 
mation to the long-time memory— 
the brain. If the signal is not repea- 
ted, the circuits will fall apart, the 
short-time memory will be switched 
off. It is presumed that there is also 
a working memory. Just watch a 
typist. When typing a text, she keeps 
in her memory only short pieces of 
it for a very short time until she 
finishes typing them. 

People were quick to see that all 


records in the brain are short-lived, 
and that extraordinary memory is, 
unhappily, the gift of very few per- 
sons. Practically, to memorize man 
had to seek the aid of artificial means 
of memory, capable of supplementing 
the natural memory of the human 
brain. 

The oldest practical method is the 
use of inscriptions and signs. It 
dates back to rock-wall pictures. Then 
came the turn of characters, and 
after them of the letters of ABC’s. 

The invention of book-printing has 
increased human memory to the di- 
mensions capable of engulfing all 
sciences, all intellectual heritage of 
mankind. 

Later photography came to the aid 
of graphics, and it was followed by 


CAPACITY OF MEMORY 65 


People learned to memorize, not only 
what they have seen, but also what 
they have heard—due to the appea- 
rance of sound recording of the me- 
chanical, photographic and magnetic 
types. 

A method of recording various com- 
mands has been devised as far back 
as the Middle Ages. Plates were 
“sensed” by pins fixed onto drums— 
bells rang, musical boxes played. 

Information was also memorized by 
holes of perforated drums of looms 
in the middle of the 18th century. 

Great prolification of artificial me- 
mory aids is characteristic of our 
time. Electromechanical and _ elect- 
ron-tube recording devices employing 
two stable states (on-off) were suc- 
ceeded by novel devices using mag- 


nets (magnetized-demagnetized), se- 
miconductors, etc. 


cinematography. This enabled events 
to be memorized in action, in time. 


Let’s take a look at the computer memory, Its electronic “memory” is used 
as a depot to store numbers and instructions. From this depot they are sent for 
processing to the “mathematical mill”. The results obtained are returned to the 
“memory”. An absolute order must be maintained ‘here to facilitate the extrac- 
tion of the necessary numbers or of a definite result. © 

The computer “memory”, its recording device, can be compared to the head- 
gear wardrobe. It’s full of hats, but each occupies its own section. Each section 
has its number. Produce your check and take your hat (yours, and nobody else’s). 
The sections of the wardrobe, its cells, all have their addresses—their numbers. 
Take, for instance, the instruction +475. It means that the number occupying 
cell 475 should be added. 

The computer, like man, has “memories” of different kinds. 

You'll smile recalling how you say aloud, when multiplying: “Seven times 
five is thirty five. We’ll write five and keep three”. The computer has to do the 
same. It, too, writes five and keeps three in its mind—memorizes. 

Sometimes an address or a telephone number is needed only once. In this case 
it is written down on any scrap of paper that comes handy. Having telephoned, 
you throw it away. If you expect to use the address or the telephone once or twice 
more, you'll, probably, copy it into your note-book or address book. This con- 
tains data the need for which will arise in due time. This is a fundamental, long- 
time “memory”. 


5—616 


66 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


mp 
eo 


+ 


7 


oy 


eben 


Ns 


OS a 


WOR KING 
“MEMORY ’"’ 


i, 
Ls) 


re 


IX 


oF 
itis 


D se 


Kx 


ap 508 ge 


1x} 
ds 


x 
x 


% 
it 
et: 
it-i5e 
a4 
+: 
Nan 


eit 
han 
met 

+ 

% 


Recording 
Reading 


LONG-TIME 


“*MEMORY"’ 


PERMANENT 
“MEMORY *’ 


Types of machine “memory”. 


The computer, too, has all these kinds of “memory”. You'll find here the 
“scrap of paper”, together with the “address book” of long-time “memory” and 
the note-book. 

The “scrap of paper” is the working “memory” directly connected with the 
arithmetical blocks of the computer. The “note-book” is the long-time recording 
devices. They serve to memorize all information introduced into the computer 
that is needed in the course of solving the problem. The “address book” of the 
computer contains constant reference data, tables, coefficients—all that, like the 
multiplication table, may be needed in calculations. Hence, its name—the per- 
manent recording block. 

The capacity and operation speed of the computer “memory” are determined 
by its construction. It is interesting to note that these two characteristics are 
closely interrelated. The simplest type of “memory” is the magnetic tape. It’s 


CAPACITY OF MEMORY 67 


easy to increase its capacity just by increasing its length. But simultaneously 
the time needed to find a number on this tape will be increased, too. Tens 
or even hundreds of metres of tape must be turned over to find the required 
data. 

Therefore, the device was adopted of increasing the capacity of the “memory” 
while at the same time decreasing the time needed to produce data, the so-called 
circulation time. 

Magnetic tape drums enable recording blocks of practically limitless capacity 
to be built. With the recording density of one number per millimetre, 500 metres 
of tape can record 500 000 numbers; one hundred tapes of this length will hold 
5-107 numbers. Compare this number with the number of signs in L. Tolstoy’s 
novel War and Peace, which is only several millions. But in this case it will take 


Designers endeavour to build reliable miniature high-speed memory elements. 


Control wire 


Numbers 


uperconducting 
film 


reading wires 
Permalloy film 


Recording and 


Reading wire 


MINIATURE 
MEMORY Printed 
ELEMENTS eb 


TRANSFLUXORS SEMICONDUCTOR ELEMENTS) 


Memory 
elements 
at joints 


T hree- 
dimensional 
elements 


5* 


68 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


several minutes to find the necessary cells with numbers. Most ingenious cont- 
raptions enabled this time to be reduced to half a second. However, this time is 
eternity for modern high-speed computers. 

So magnetic drums were invented. The magnetic drum is, in essence, a very 
wide magnetic tape closed to form a loop. It contains many—up to eighty— 
recording paths. This requires a corresponding number of recording and reading 
heads. 

The drum holds up to 30 thousand numbers, which are recorded, as on the tape, 
by magnetizing small areas of the surface. 

The drum revolves at a high speed that sometimes reaches 12 thousand revo- 
lutions per minute. The necessary number, or group of numbers, is read or recor- 


ded in the time of one revolution. 


It will not be an exaggeration to 
state that the history of progress in 
high-speed computers coincides with 
the history of the improvement of 
their “memory”. Quite recently elect- 
ron-tube “memory”, as in a televi- 
sion set, was considered high-speed 
“memory”. 

Next ferrite-core “memory” was 
produced. Its speed of over 300 thou- 
sand circulations per second is coup- 
led with high reliability and small 
space requirements: 1 cm* can “hou- 
se” a thousand information elements 
(bits). 

The working “memory” of most 
up-to-date computers holds up to ten 
million bits. 

However, even such “memory” cha- 
racteristics can no longer satisfy the 
designers, and they strive with all 
means to increase its capacity and 
data production speed. For this rea- 
son most recent advances in physics 
are being used to construct “memo- 
ry”: tunnel diodes, cryogenic elements, 
thin magnetic. films—these so-called 
microminiaturization elements. 

But despite such impressive qua- 
lities of the computer “memory”, it 
still in many respects falls short of 
human memory. 


The capacity of our memory, as 
has been assessed above, is enor- 
mous. Here is one more example to 
make the matter obvious. The total 
number of all electron tubes and 
transistors manufactured throughout 
the world is comparable to the to- 
tal number of neurons in the brain 
of one man, the capacity of his me- 
mory being equal to up to one mil- 
lion billions of bits! And its reliabi- 
lity, too, is much higher than that 
of computer “memory”. The more 
elements the memory blocks contain, 
the higher is the probability of their 
failure. If a complex “memory” ag- 
gregate contains millions of elements, 
it will not function properly because 
of frequent faults. The brain, on 
the other hand, despite the fact 
that it contains billions of neurons, 
works “without fatigue”, the memory, 
practically, never stops and does not 
need repair. 

Let’s compare now the volume oc- 
cupied by the memories of man and 
computer. The volume of man’s brain 
is some one and a half cubic deci- 
metres; and electronic brain with 
compatible semiconductor memory 
would require a great building 100 
metres high. The brain’s power con- 


sumption does not exceed ten watts; 
a hydro-electric station would be 
needed to power a corresponding com- 
puter “memory”. However, much bet- 
ter results are now being obtained 
with integrated circuits (IC). 

And, of course, there remains the 
paramount advantage that every one 
of us feels every minute. During our 
lifetime we register millions of events 
and impressions which accumulate to 
make our intellectual wealth bound- 
less. This wealth is a powerful source 
of supply for man’s emotional life. 
Man retains intact in his memory 
the colours of the setting sun of 
some evening in his youth, as well as 
hardly perceptible events from his 
private life. 

We are tempted at this place to 
cite some examples from a book on 
bionics of how man memorizes im- 
pressions once received. The French 
graphic Gustave Doré (the author of 
well-known illustrations of Francois 
Rabelais’ book Gargantua and Pan- 
tagruel) once received an order from 
his publisher for a copy of a photo- 
graph of an Alpine landscape. Doré 
went home and forgot to take the 
photograph with him. On the follo- 
wing day he brought an exact copy 
of the photograph. It’s an estab- 
lished fact that the best portrait of 
President Lincoln was made by his 
provincial admirer who saw him only 
once. 

The contemporaries of Julius Cae- 
sar and Alexander the Great cre- 
dit them with knowing all their sol- 
diers by name and by sight though 
they numbered as great as 30 000. 
It’s rumoured that Mozart managed 
to write down accurately a long intri- 
cate symphony which he heard only 
once. The composer Glazunov had no 


CAPACITY OF MEMORY 69 


difficulty in reproducing lost scores 
of long musical compositions. The 
brilliant pianist Rachmaninov had to 
listen to a piano concert only once 
to reproduce it correctly. The pro- 
minent chess-player A. Alekhine held 
in his memory all the chess games 
played and could simultaneously play 
with 30-40 partners without looking - 
at the chess-boards. 

Our memory is defined as asso- 
ciative. 

Reminiscences follow each other in 
a logical process that guards the brain 
against excessive work by providing 
it with necessary information at the 
right moment, imparting to it a won- 
derful inventiveness. 

The “memory” of the electronic 
brain looks quite humble alongside 
this wonder of nature. Inferior capa. 
city (as compared to the capacity of 
our brain) is not the main drawhack 
of the computer “memory”. Its tra- 
gedy is its impotence in searching 
for information on the “shelves” 
of the electronic or magnetic “de- 
pots”. 

To find a definite “reminiscence” 
the computer has to look through 
tens of thousands of information bits, 
just as a negligent store-keeper would 
look through his store to find a lost 
item. 

True, scientists foresee the possibi- 
lity of increasing the compactness of 
computer “memory” to that of the 
brain. If this materialized, the com- 
puter would be able to store in a 
volume of 1 cu m all information 
accumulated by mankind in all its 
history! This is equivalent to 100 000 
billion bits of information. This gives 
us reason to hope for a practically 
unlimited working memory in the 
computers of the future. 


70 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


It’s a firm belief of modern science 
that progress in many branches of 
knowledge depends to a great extent 
on the solution of the problem of 
human memory and on the level of 


development of artificial computer 
memory. 

That’s why so much attention in 
this encyclopaedia is focused on this 
apparently narrow question. 


“We've got chemistry today.” 


COMPUTER CENTRE 


A plant equipped 

with electronic computers. 
Designed to carry out 
complicated and labour-consuming 
calculations. 


The Factory of Numbers 


This is a perfectly new type of 
plant. It’s a factory that receives 
and processes raw materials quite ex- 
traordinary from the usual point of 
view and turns out quite extraordi- 
nary products—numbers. For this rea- 
son the name—the factory of num- 
bers—has stuck to the computer centre. 

Everything and in every way is 
calculated here! Mathematical, engi- 
neering and economic problems are 
solved, the so-called routine calcula- 
tions are carried out, methods of 
numerical solution, methods of pro- 
gramming and methods of mathema- 
tical and technical servicing of elect- 
ronic computers are developed, cen- 
sus results are worked out, pay is 
calculated, etc., etc. The task per- 
forméd depends on the type of the 
computer centre. 

Let’s enter this CC, as it’s termed 
briefly. 

Without a guide we won’t be able 
to find our way among numerous ma- 
chines, sectors and services. Let’s ask 
an expert from the sector of mathe- 
matical preparation to tell us about 
the work of the CC. 


There are three main sectors in the 
computer centre. The first is the 
sector for mathematical preparation 
and for programming of problems. 
Programmists work here. They com- 
pile programmes—lists of rules in 
compliance with which the machines 
solve various problems. This is one 
of the main departments. It decides 
upon the manner in which the com- 
puters are going to “mill” mountains 
of numbers, and foresees what will 
come out of it. 

To guarantee normal working of 
the “mathematical grindstones” there 
is another department—the mainte- 
nance sector. Highly qualified engineers 
watch computer operation, their condi- 
tion, and provide for timely repairs. 


Electronic computers are no simple 
units. They consume much power, 
their temperature rises. The premi- 
ses where they are installed require 
ventilation. 

Therefore, a sector of auxiliary 
equipment is needed whose employees 
watch electrical equipment and ven- 
tilation. 


“Let’s calculate something,” 
poses the guide. 

He goes to the control panel and 
types on the keys like those of a ty- 
pewriter: “January 29, 1970, the ex- 
cursion of sixth-grade pupils from 
school No. 341 of the Bauman dis- 
trict of Moscow.” 

We take a long time to agree upon 
the problem to be solved. Meanwhile 
holes are being punched in the cards, 
and we are told: this is a problem being 
solved in accordance with the plan. 

We will learn how it’s being sol- 
ved as we go through the shops of 
the “counting factory”. 


pro- 


71 


72 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


First we come to the key-board 
counting machines department. It re- 
minds one of a big typing office. 
There are automatic arithmometers on 
special tables. They look like type- 
writers. The fingers of the operator 
run fluently over multi-coloured keys. 
He types numbers—items, multipli- 
cants, dividends and devisors. By 
pressing definite keys the operator 
makes the machine automatically per- 
form some arithmetical operation. 
A short buzz of the electric motor, a 
light clatter of the gearwheels, and 
the result is there, on the counter 
of the arithmometer. The operator 
enters the result on a blank. And his 
fingers are on the keys again. 

We are told that it is no easy job 
to prepare for computing operations. 
There are some very complicated ca- 
ses. For example, there are numerous 
factors that have to be taken into 
account in constructing a space rock- 
et. It must be controlled from the 
Earth. The rocket has liquid-propel- 
lant rocket engines which enable it 
to rise to a great height. Its body 
houses extremely sophisticated devi- 
ces, control system equipment, fuel 
and oxidizer tanks. 

Before starting the design work, 
many calculations have to be made. 
It must be taken into account that 
such a rocket is launched vertically 
and at the start, during the first 
period of its flight, it passes through 
the densest layers of the atmos- 
phere. The main part of its trajectory, 
however, passes in vacuum. The 
Earth’s air jacket intensively decelera- 
tes the rocket. As a result of air 
friction the rocket’s body is intensively 
heated. This, too, has to be taken 
into account. 

Trajectories should not be compu- 


ted with the aid of simple equations 
without taking into account the afo- 
resaid factors. Otherwise a situation 
may arise of thesort in which the per- 
sonages of Jules Verne found themsel- 
ves when they failed to reach the Moon. 

Of course, computations of this kind 
were not made in our presence. We 
saw only some auxiliary work—the 
checks of operation stages, of compu- 
tation accuracy. The mathematicians 
can be said to follow the long path 
leading from the equations and for- 
mulae to tables and numbers. The 
flow-line production of all this gi- 
gantic mass will be done by power- 
ful electronic computers. 

They occupy the main shop of the 
computer centre. One wonders a lit- 
tle seeing such vast work being done 
so silently and unostentatiously. Only 
the light hum of the computer and 
the rattle of the typing device filling 
in long paper tapes with columns of 
numbers tell of the untiring work of 
the “mathematical mill”. 

The computer centre may be con- 
nected by special communications 
channels with the organizations it 
serves: with plants and factories, in- 
stitutes and offices. This is the more 
economical and advantageous method 
that provides for continuity of work 
and for standardization of maintenance. 

One computer centre can do the 
work of an army of calculators tens 
of thousands strong. Computation 
with the aid of computers saves mil- 
lions of roubles. Even a small com- 
puter, say, “Minsk-22”, brings 50 
thousand roubles profit per year. For- 
merly, a computation requiring one 
year’s work of calculators was unac- 
ceptable to many design bureaus. And 
now? Now a problem requiring a 
hundred years of calculators’ work is 


considered simple. A common CC 
does it inside 24 hours. 

Twenty-four hours instead of a hun- 
dred years! 

Such a reduction in time needed 
for computation work opened up great 


COMPUTER CENTRE 73 


possibilities in science, technology, 
in the control of national economy. 

So you see what great feats are ac- 
complished by computers assembled 
under the roof of a building the sign- 
board of which bears the letters CC. 


A computer centre. 


74 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Here’s a first-class computer centre. The area of its premises amounts to 4000 m2, 
Some 500 people work here, of them 150 are highly qualified mathematicians. 

The centre has several big electronic digital computers. One of them works 
at a rate of up to a million operations per second. There are, as well, several sets 
of automatic calculating machines of simpler types and up to a hundred table 
key-board calculating machines. 

The CC, like a big plant, works in three shifts. Computers are expensive. It is 
unprofitable to let such valuable equipment stand idle. Once a week “the number 
factory” stands still: there is no rattle of the typing devices, no monotonous 
hum of the computers. Expert engineers test, tune and carry out maintenance 
repairs—the computers must always be in a working condition. Should anything 
go wrong, and there will be a flood of mistakes on the tapes where the compu- 
tation results are printed. The computers demand precision. 

There are hundreds of computer centres in this country. Some of them are the 
so-called principal centres, for instance, the Computer Centre of the Academy of 
Sciences of the USSR, the Principal Computer Centre of the State Planning Com- 
mittee of the USSR. There are computer centres working at the Academy of Sci- 
ences of the Ukraine, of Byelorussia, of Georgia, of other Union Republics of the 
USSR, in many of the larger cities. Nowadays powerful factories for the proces- 
sing of numbers ceased to be a rarity. 

Computer centres may serve various purposes: the general-purpose CC, CC for 
computations of plans and for economic studies, CC for branches of industry. 

In the drawing you saw a general-purpose computer centre. Specialized CC 
are somewhat different. They may have a smaller number of low-power machi- 
nes. Research work of a general nature, such as the principal problems of com- 
puter mathematics, is not done at a branch or a specialized computer centre, 
general methods of solving scientific problems are not developed here either. 
These centres carry out concrete computations in the field of planning of natio- 
nal economy, in economics. There is a lot of accounting and statistical work to 
be done here and of calculations for administrative purposes. 


Recently a new trend in the use puter systems for collective use. These 
of electronic computers and of com- will be permanent systems to which 
puter centres has developed. A ten- several subscribers would be able to 
dency may be observed to “collecti- apply at any time for any reference, 
vize” them, to unite them into com- for any computation, because they 


Computer employed in the divided time mode to serve multiple subscribers. This makes a dia- 
logue between the subscriber and the computer possible. This faculty of information exchange 
exists for several subscribers as well. Tens of distant subscribers, too, may be connected to the 
computer. F 

Several types of such connections are shown: a scientist in his flat, an engineer in a design of- 
fice, a research worker in his laboratory, a scientist at an institute, a secretary preparing matter 
for print, a mathematician, a newspaper editor, an historian, a physicist. 

The automatic distribution of computer time is much more efficient than the usual mode of 
employing computers, it saves time and money. 


eS i 4 is ” 


as pl! 
{ is 
PNY 


RRy 


44 


G fe 


76 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


will be operating in the so-called 
divided time mode. 

This is already a communal-pur- 
pose CC. 

It can be used in the same way as we 
use water, gas, electricity, telephone. 

Since the computers will be equip- 
ped with universal input and output 
devices which can read normal type, 
typed messages, produce visual data, 
record oral messages and receive oral 
commands, the communications with 
them will be by means of telephone 
or television. 


In other words, electronic compu- 
ters, their immense “memory” reser- 
ves, the centres of information and 
computation centres will be freely ac- 
cessible, without go-betweens, irres- 
pective of time and distance. 

In the near future it will be as 
difficult to find “individual” compu- 
ters (serving one plant), as it is now 
difficult to find. a plant with a pri- 
vate power station. It is much more 
economical and profitable to draw 
power from a single nation-wide po- 
wer system. 


“Did you ever work with such a computer??? 


"No, but Ill manage,” 


CONTROL COMPUTER 


A computer employed 
for automatic control 
of a complex object. 


Where Man Is Inadequate 


For a better understanding of the 
importance of control computers for 
modern industry let’s start the story 
about them from the very beginning. 
Let’s together with engineering spe- 
cialists make a historical survey and 
assess the role of the machine in hu- 
man life, to be precise, in industry. 

As is well known, even primitive 
machines imitated the faculties of 
man. For example, first machines in- 
creased man’s strength. Objects could 
be transported, moved and lifted with 
the aid of a lever or a block. 

After machines used to transform 
and increase force came the turn of 
machines that effected mechanical 
motion. 

Let’s take another faculty—preci- 
sion. The invention of vice for fixing 
objects led to the precision of their 
working being improved. This, if you 
like, already constituted a step from 
the transformation of force and of 
motion to control. 

Later another problem sprang up: 
how to effect control of a sequence 
of operations, how to go over from 
one product to another. 


Man does it easily—he’s got a spe- 
cial “control device”, the brain. When 
first computers were built, it became 
possible for the first time to devise 
artificial systems for such complex 
control operations. 

But there are different types of 
control—there is a true hierarchy of 
them, depending on the level of con- 
trol. In modern conditions with the 
aid of modern technology it is not 
difficult to make a lathe work pro- 
perly. But to make the lathe work 
efficiently, as well, a higher level of 
control is needed. To this end a more 
advanced faculty of man should be 
copied—that of acting rationally. 

And now let’s make another step 
up the hierarchy of control—we’re 
ready for it. 

Let’s take a whole factory with 
numerous machine tools. You’ll have 
to agree that its control is of a higher 
order, since in this case the bounds 
of man’s abilities to do without spe- 
cialized electronic assistants are ex- 
ceeded. People nowadays can make 
plans for the operation of a factory, 
and get some results. But because of 
a large amount of initial data they 
are unable without some kind of as- 
sistance to arrive at a correct plan 
for the complex utilization of all 
tools, that would take account of 
raw materials reserves, orders, and 
other conditions. 

Let’s take this example. The old 
Putilovy plant at the dawn of the 
20th century produced machines 
made exclusively of metal. Nothing 
but coal, coke and pig iron was 
transported to this plant from other 
plants. 


Now the same plant has hundreds. 


77 


78 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


of subcontractors, because its products 
are much more intricate. Some of 
its machines even have electronic de- 
vices and blocks installed in them. 
Tens of thousands of parts made by 
other plants are needed to make these 
new products. Try to synchronize, 
to combine everything into a single 
complex—the operation of the tools, 
the work of the employees, the arri- 
val of raw materials, the completion 
of products—so that there is no in- 
terruptions or delays, so that the 
whole plant functions like a well- 
tuned engine. 

It’s in such cases that intricate 
control devices are needed. 

See how useful was this short ex- 
cursion into history—step by step we 
covered the distance from simple ma- 
chines capable of increasing man’s 
strength, of aiding his muscles, to 
intricate machines designed to inc- 
rease man’s control abilities, to auto- 
matic systems capable of supplemen- 
ting the human nervous system, the 
brain. 

Scientists have calculated that in 
modern industry the power of one 
worker equivalent, on the average, 
to 0.4 hp is increased by his mecha- 
nical assistants to the mean value 
of 1000 hp. An analogous degree of 
amplification of intellectual abilities 
could be obtained, too. Control com- 
puters are now playing the part of 
such magic amplifiers. 


What are the properties peculiar 
to them? 

First and foremost, they are prin- 
cipally different from other machi- 
nes. It’s an absolutely new class of 
man’s assistants—not machine tools, 
or engines. Control computers trans- 
form information into control pro- 
cesses. And this, as a rule, involves 
calculations. 

The task of control computers is 
to maintain normal or maximum (but 
always efficient) operating conditions, 
maximum productivity, high pro- 
duct quality, minimum costs of la- 
bour, raw materials and power. Those 
tasks are difficult tasks, as you see. 

Here is the Soviet “Dnieper” con- 
trol system. 

It can do the job of an accountant, 
of a steel-maker, of an economist, or 
of a pilot. All depends upon the 
programme which has been introdu- 
ced into it. “Dnieper” has been used 
with success in the steel and ship- 
building industries. It’s also been 
used to process the data of complica- 
ted physical experiments. 

The system consists of two parts: 
a central device—an electronic com- 
puter, and a control complex. In ac- 
cordance with its programme the ope- 
rating computer “interrogates” seve- 
ral hundred gauges installed on ob- 
jects under control. Next, it proces- 
ses the information received and sends 
instructions to the objects. 


Let’s watch the control device controlling a powerful rolling mill. 

Red-hot 20-ton steel slabs over half a metre thick radiating unbearable heat 
leave the furnace and pass through the 12-roll stands of the rolling mill to turn 
gradually into thin steel sheet. This is an enormously difficult job to roll asteel slab 
into thin sheet, and an extremely exacting one—the deviation in the thickness of the 
sheet from the standard value must not exceed several hundredths of a millimetre. 


CONTROL COMPUTER 


Elongating as it is being rolled the steel moves between the rolls of the last 
stand at a speed of 900 metres per minute or nearly 60 kilometres per hour. And 
despite this speed, control gauges installed along the rolling path manage to 
report to the control device the thickness and the stress of steel at various stages 
of the rolling process. Zonal regulators will measure the temperature in the fur- 
nace and correct it, special gauges will mark the changes in metal. 

The cybernetic commander will re-arrange all incoming data, compare it with 
the standard recorded in its “memory” and instantly decide what corrections 
are needed in the speed and pressure of individual rolls to ensure the required 
thickness of the rolled sheet. 

A deviation of 0.13 mm from the specified thickness of the sheet is considered 
normal. The controlling device managed to reduce it to 0.076 mm—nearly twofold! 

It was not overnight that experts in automation succeeded in building such 
perfect computers for the control of technological processes. During the first 
experiments in the use of computers operators introduced into them data they 
read off the instruments. On the basis of this information the electronic computer 
evolved directions for the tuning of control devices. Naturally, the operator 
retarded the control process. Moreover, he was not a very reliable part of such 
a system. Then it was decided to connect the instruments directly to the com- 
puter. Now it could itself read off data needed for computations. But still the 
operator had to tune the control devices in accordance with computer directions. 

Only the third stage of contro] improvement resulted in full automation. It 
involved the direct connection of measuring and control instruments and control 
mechanisms with the computer. And what did this lead to? 

Let’s take a specialized paper on the subject: “The computer connected with 
hundreds of gauges through its own communication system quickly collects in- 
formation about deviations from the standard technological process and ana- 
lyses these data. It can find out with fantastic speed what takes place, say, ina 
rolling mill or in a chemical plant, where accurate determination of the course 
of the process involves thousands of calculations. Having analysed the situation 
the computer decides quickly how valves, injectors, rollers and sundry mechanisms 
should be regulated. Then it takes appropriate action. Through the communi- 
cations line it sends instructions to organs controlling individual mechanisms 
of the aggregate, ordering them to carry out the necessary tuning. 

“Literally without the slightest interference by man the computer can repeat 
the operation several hundred times a day, week after week, using free minutes 
to type concise reports of its work.” 


First results of computer applica- 
tion were the most impressive in 
four major industries: power, metal- 
lurgical, oil-processing and chemical. 
Why? They all belong to the so-cal- 
led mass production type with nume- 
rous control parameters. 


To automate power production the 
readings of thousands of control in- 
struments must be taken into acco- 
unt. 

The control system must carry out 
some 1000 control operations in se- 
quence only to put a thermal power 


79 


CONTROL 
Pil OMP R 


SPEED AND... 
INSTRUMENT CONTROL 


station turbine into full operation: 
it must watch the cooling, the water 
level in the boilers, the flame, etc. 

But this turns out to be only the 
beginning of a difficult work. Having 
put the aggregate into operation, the 
computer must control the tempera- 
ture and the pressure of the steam, 
and the speed of the turbine accor- 
ding to the readings of 1560 instru- 
ments. 

And this is its everyday work. It 
has also to be on a look-out for emer- 
gency situations—everything can hap- 
pen in a power-station. Should gas 
(the usual fuel) be cut off the compu- 
ter will carry out fifty operations to 
change the burner over from gas to 
oil (the reserve fuel). Even when a 
turbine bearing fails, the computer 
commander is not terrified. It is 
capable of switching off the colossal 
power plant in the spell of several 
minutes. 

In addition, the computer simulta- 
neously calculates technical and eco- 
nomic data, sums up report data, 
calculates the efficiency coefficient of 
the plant. 

There is one more property left to 
complete the description of the con- 
trol computer—it makes no mistakes. 

Now is the time to revert to the 
hierarchy of control, to the higher 
and lower levels of it. One of the ini- 
tiators of control systems develop- 
ment in the USSR, Academician 
V. Glushkov, defines their tasks in 
these words: 

“For the lower control level com- 


CONTROL COMPUTER 81 


paratively simple highly reliable com- 
puters are usually chosen. Their task 
is to work with the object of control 
on the real time scale. Each of the 
lower-level computers can do the job 
of several tens or even hundreds of 
automatic regulators. A higher-level 
computer is a much more intricate 
machine with a much more compli- 
cated structure. Such a computer 
works with up to several tens of lower- 
level computers, and is engaged, as 
a rule, in optimizing calculations, 
planning and organizing the work of 
the system as a whole.” 

Now you see that the step-by-step, 
hierarchical structure of control sys- 
tems automatically leads to a na- 
tural change over to systems control- 
ling entire factories, firms and even 
industries. 

This to a greater degree obviates 
the need for continuous inspection of 
the automata by man. All control 
and regulating functions are concen- 
trated in one block. 

Man ruling over the production 
process plays the part of a strategist, 
because now he is free from the ne- 
cessity of solving minor problems of 
operation, from the routine everyday 
factory work. 

Meet the control system of the 
Lvov television receiver plant. Its 
name is “Lvov”. It’s a system typi- 
cal of mass production plants. It 
can be connected to the country-wide 
system of economics control. In one 
year “Lvov” helped to achieve a 
20-per cent increase in production 


The control computer in control of a rolling mill. Steel slabs pass through the furnace (1), pass 
at great speed through a row of mills: cutting-off (2), rolling (3), grinding mill (5), and 
finally leave the rollers of the coiler in the shape of thin sheets. The dashed line shows the 
route of input data to the control computer; the solid line shows the route of instructions 
to control centres and thence to individual instruments. 


6—616 


82 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


due to a more efficient utilization 
of materials, a better adherence to 
the time-table, an improved techno- 
logy and advanced organizational and 
technical control. 

It really is an unheard-of thing— 
an increase in television sets produc- 
tion by nearly 20 thousand without 
any increase in production equip- 
ment. 

The main part in the “Lvov” con- 
trol system is played by the electro- 
nic computer “Minsk-22”. It receives 
information about the progress in the 
work from the technological produc- 
tion scheme as well as from the pro- 
duct counters installed on the assem- 
bly line and in the product control 
department. The control is aided by 
a whole complex of means of traffic 
control: television sets, telephones, 


signalling system, light boards of 
different sorts. Rapid printing devices 
make out summary reports. All do- 
cumentation in the plant is transac- 
ted so as to facilitate its feeding into 
the computer. 

The industry of the USSR already 
employs several control systems. In 
addition to “Dnieper” and “Lvov” 
there is, for instance, the “Complex”. 
It’s an expert at controlling large 
thermal power stations. The “Cas- 
cade” has no rivals in the art of 
controlling ammonia plants. The “Tai- 
ga” is a real commonwealth of six- 
teen “Angara” electronic computers 
and two “Baikal” computers. Such 
a powerful system proved necessary 
to control the gigantic paper-chemi- 
cal mill—the Bratsk wood-processing 
complex in the Irkutsk area. 


CYBERNETICS 


The science of the general 
principles of control, 

means of control 

and their utilization 

in engineering, living organisms 
and human society. 


&lt; 


What’s Common to Oranges and Kings? 


A little over a hundred years ago 
André Marie Ampére, the French phy- 
sicist and mathematician, completed 
a voluminous work Essai sur la phi- 
losophie des sciences (Essays on the 
Philosophy of Science), in which he 
sought to systematize the human 
knowledge of his day. In it he clas- 
sified all the known sciences of his 
day under different numbers, leaving 
a few numbers for conjectural scien- 
ces. Under number 83 he listed a 
science that was to deal with the 
methods of regulating society. Am- 
pere termed this science “Cyberne- 
tics”, from the Greek word “kyber- 
netes”, meaning “steersman”, “helms- 
man”. In fact, in Ancient Greece 
cybernetics was the science of ship 
navigation. 

In his classification of sciences Am- 
pére placed cybernetics under the 
general heading of “Politics” which 
he defined as a science of “the first 
order”. As such, he subdivided it 
into sciences of the second order 
(among which, incidentally, he inclu- 
ded the science of coexistence), and 
of the third order, to which he rele- 


6* 


ort cybernetics, the science of con- 
trol. 

Ampére also provided each science 
with a versed motto in Latin. For 
cybernetics he provided the highly 
symbolic motto: “... et secura cives 
ut pace fruantur” (“... and secures 
for citizens the possibility of enjoying 
peace”). 

After Ampére, however, the term 
“cybernetics” was forgotten until it 
reappeared again in 1948 in a book 
by the well-known American mathe- 
matician Norbert Wiener entitled Cy- 
bernetics or Control and Communica- 
tion in the Animal and the Machine. 
Although the laws invoked by Wie- 
ner as the basis of cybernetics had 
been discovered and investigated long 
before he had written his book, it 
evoked widespread interest among 
scientists of many specialities. 

The cornerstones of cybernetics are 
information theory, the theory of 
algorithms, and the theory of auto- 
matic systems which investigates the 
methods of building data-processing 
systems. Its mathematical apparatus 
is extremely extensive and includes 
the theory of probability, the theory 
of functions, mathematical logic, to 
name but a few. 


Among the major contributors to 
the advancement of cybernetics have 
been the biological sciences which 
study control processes in living na- 
ture. But the decisive factor in the 
new science’s emergence was the swift 
development of electronic automation 
and especially the appearance of high- 
speed computers which opened up 
literally boundless vistas in data pro- 
cessing and the modelling of control 
systems. 


83 


84 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Just as the composer seeks to express 
all human emotions and moods in 
terms of musical notation, so cyber- 
netics seeks to express all situations 
and processes in nature and in human 
conscience in terms of digits. 

The foundations of cybernetics were 
laid and its basic principles formu- 
lated over centuries by the work of 
mathematicians, physicists, physi- 
cians and engineers. Of outstanding 
importance were the works of Ameri- 
can scientists Claude Shannon and 
John von Neumann and the ideas 
of the world famous Russian physio- 
logist Ivan Pavlov. Historians note 
the important contributions of such 
outstanding engineers and mathemati- 
cians as I. Vyshnegradsky, A. Lya- 
punoy, and A. Kolmogorov. 

It would, in fact, be more correct 
to say that 1948 saw, not the birth 
but the christening of cybernetics as 
the science of control. By then the 
problem of improving the quality of 
control in our complex technological 
world had become especially acute. 
It was cybernetics that blazed the 
way for applying precise scientific 
analysis in solving problems of con- 
trol of modern technological hard- 
ware. 

Nowadays cybernetics is a fashio- 
nable word bandied about in sundry 
engineering, scientific and popular 
journals. Cybernetics is the subject 
of books and lectures, scientific se- 
minars and international conferences 
with the participation of mathemati- 
cians and physicists, biologists, phy- 
siologists and psychiatrists, economists 
and philosophers, engineers of va- 
rious specialities. They are all uni- 


ted by the common goal of achieving 
maximum automation of control pro- 
cesses in various spheres of human 
activity and of enhancing labour pro- 
ductivity. And this requires a deep 
and comprehensive study of control- 
led and controllable systems, know- 
ledge of the laws governing control 
processes, and determination of the 
principles governing the organization 
and structure of control systems. Ine- 
vitably, the living organism became 
the object of the closest scrutiny and 
thorough investigation: man himself 
represents a control system of the 
highest order whose functions engi- 
neers and scientists would like to 
reproduce in automatic gadgetry. 

Cybernetics studies the common 
properties of different control sys- 
tems, properties which are quite in- 
dependent of their material basis. 
They can equally be manifested in 
living nature, in the organic world, 
in human collectives. 

These common properties manifest 
themselves in many ways, and pri- 
marily in the structure of complex 
dynamic control systems. There is a 
continuous exchange of information 
between the controlled object—whe- 
ther a machine or transfer line, an 
industrial enterprise or military unit, 
a living protein-synthesizing cell or a 
muscle, a written text for translation 
or a set of symbols to be made into 
a work of art—and the control unit— 
the brain and nerve tissue of a living 
organism or an automatic regu- 
lator. 

The control process always and 
everywhere involves the transmission, 
accumulation, storage and processing 


The tree of cybernetics. » 


Factory Medical 
management diagnosis 


Astronomy, Translation, 
astronautics linguistics 


Engineering 
problems, 
construction 


Transport Information 


: Planning 
control service 


= without 
Qo ~ 
2 


Theory of Genetic 
computability problems 
land algorithm 


Modelling 
thinking pro- 
cesses 


Communica- 
tion channels 


automatic 
control and 


7 ion : 
Information Ararat siicdel repate Statistical Machines 


theory machines that learn 


86 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


of information about the controlled 
object, process, environmental condi- 
tions, work programme, etc. 
Obviously, the nature of the in- 
formation carriers may vary widely 
from system to system: sound, light, 
mechanical, electrical or chemical sig- 
nals, punched or magnetic tape, mas- 
ter patterns, etc., may be employed. 
The important thing is, as mentio- 
ned before, that, irrespective of the 
material carrier of information, the 


processes of transmitting it obey cer- 
tain common quantitative laws. 

A characteristic feature of the whole 
diversity of such systems is the 
feedback. Through it they receive in- 
formation on the effects or results of 
their control operations. 

Finally, the control systems—li- 
ving and man-made—incorporate ele- 
ments performing similar jobs: the 
receiving, classification, memoriza- 
tion, etc., of information. 


On page 84 is represented the “genealogical tree” of cybernetics which offers 


vivid illustration of the scope of its applications. 

Cybernetics can be subdivided into theoretical (mathematical and logical basis 
and philosophical problems), technological (design and operation of control and 
computer hardware) and applied (use of theoretical and technological cybernetics 
for solving specific control tasks in industry, power supply, transport, communi- 
cations, etc.). 

The remarkable similarity of control processes in systems of entirely different 
nature provided the basis for the development of cybernetics, which uses mathe- 
matical methods to study control systems and processes. 

This definition of cybernetics reminds us that its subject of investigation is, 
primarily, quantitative laws, quantitative relationships in control proces- 
ses. 

It should be noted that cybernetics does not identify processes which take 
place in the living organism or society with processes in automatic systems. Nor 
is it interested in specifically biophysical or biochemical processes which charac- 
terize living nature. It restricts itself to investigating how a living organism or 
machine processes the information relevant to the control process. The same 
holds for society. 

Cybernetics seeks to discover common features of the two control systems. 
It studies human thinking to create algorithms more or less faithfully describing 
the operation of this living control system. It also studies the automata design 
principles and investigates the possibilities of using them to mechanize human 
mental processes. Thus cybernetics enriches engineers engaged in creating comp- 
lex automatic systems with the experience of nature which over millions of 
years has evolved the most complex system in the world, the human orga- 
nism. ’ 

Cybernetics also helps physiologists and psychiatrists in their investigations 
of this organism, in discovering the quantitative laws governing the functioning 
of living control systems. 

Cybernetics helps to discover various laws in economics and sociology. 


That is why the theoretical and 
practical importance of cybernetics 
is so great and diversified. And that 
is why an ever increasing number of 


CYBERNETICS 87 


scientists are devoting their creative 
efforts to the advance of this most 
promising and exciting of scien- 


ces. 


88 CYBERNETICS IN BIOLOGY 
RBS RS EG TARR TRB DO I ABS 7IL 


Application of the methods Living Matter under the “Microscope” 


and means of cybernetics of Numbers 


to the study of living organisms, We shall begin our discussion of 
the applications of cybernetics in bio- 
i ; logy with a confession made by the 
and to the creation of devices celebrated cybernetician and physio- 
for maintaining normal body logist, Walter R. Ashby: “The se- 
cond peculiar virtue of cybernetics 
is that it offers a method for the scien- 
tific treatment of the system in which 
complexity is outstanding and too 
important to be ignored. Such sys- 
tems are, as we well know, only 
too common in _ the biological 
world.” 


to building models of their functions 


functioning. 


One doesn't have to go too far to find confirmation of the Complexity of 


Biological Systems: take the human brain. Not so long ago it was thought to 
be made up of some 14000 million neurons intricately interlinked and 
connected by nerve fibres with al] body organs and tissues. And the newest 
data indicate that the brain’s complexity is in fact much greater. The 
cerebellum — the controller of the central nervous system — has some 100 000 
million cells. 

Nor is the cell itself a simple structure. It is a diversified enterprise with dif- 
ferent “shops” and “workplaces”, with its “power supply”, “time service” and 
“transport means”. 

The complexity of the biological world is acknowledged universally. But it 
is additionally compounded by the enormous changeability of biological pheno- 
mena. Take the leaves of a tree. Can you find two absolutely identical ones in 
size and shape? Or, when a scientist takes a mouse or a frog for an experiment, 
can he ever expect to find all the animals’ organs in exactly the same state even 
if the animals are precisely of the same age and weight? Take another example. 
A man’s height is considered a relatively simple characteristic. But how it varies! 
The smallest known height of an adult is 38 centimetres, the greatest is 283 cen- 
timetres. 

Besides being extremely complex and changeable the biological world possesses 
another important characteristic: dynamics, eternal motion, continuous work. 
A never-ending process of coordination of the work of different organs goes in 
every living organism; there is a continuous stream of information on the state 
of its systems; conditions of the environment, temperature and pressure are al- 
ways maintained constant. 

Complexity, changeability and dynamics present the greatest difficulties in 
the study of living organisms. Biologists view with envy the charts and diagrams 


CYBERNETICS IN BIOLOGY 


Nuclear 
membrane 


Nucleole 


Nucleus 


Mitochondria 


Plastids 


The living cell can be likened to an integrated industrial plant. 


of physicists, chemists, engineers. The data obtained in experiments can be rep- 
resented on them in consecutive series of dots which reveal to the specialist the 
laws governing the phenomenon under consideration. 

It is extremely difficult to grasp, describe and represent graphically the comp- 
lexity of living systems. This is the complex, tangled world which cybernetics 
is invading through two main gates at the termini of its two main directions, 
theoretical and applied. 

This subdivision as it were delineates the spheres of activity of cybernetics 
in biology: the purpose of theoretical research is to elaborate problems connected 
with the investigation and description of various control functions, control “mo- 
tions” in the body. This is “internal” cybernetics. It seeks to understand how 
various control and controlled systems function within the organism, what com- 
munication channels transmit the signals about various actions. 


Scientists study with great interest cal analogues. It is employed by 


the processes of self-regulation and 
feedback in living organisms. Their 
role was underscored by one biolo- 
gist, who declared that life origina- 
ted with the origination of the first 
feedback and control process; in fact, 
self-regulation is recognized as a uni- 
versal law of life. 

Cybernetics provides biologists with 
the invaluable method of mathemati- 


workers of the USSR Academy of 
Sciences Biophysical Institute and the 
Ukrainian Academy’s Cybernetics In- 
stitute to study the role of feedback 
in biochemical processes at molecular 
level. Latvian scientists, for their 
part, decided to probe the secrets of 
protein synthesis in the living cell. 
The cell functions as a fully automa- 
ted protein “factory” performing a 


89 


90 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Motor nerve system 


Vegetative 
nervous system 


Thermoregula-? [/ 
tion centre TJ 


i 


o 
2 
P=} 
© 
2 
o 
ro 
&amp; 
3} 
2 
se} 
3 
2 
rea 


(=i 


ae 


The human body’s ability to maintain a 
constant body temperature is a result of 
complex regulation processes. 


most complex biological process. For 
this they devised several programmes 
which they fed into a computer. In 
other words, they constructed an elec- 
tronic model of the cell. Thanks to 
this approach they were able not only 
to answer the questions they had set 
themselves originally, but they also 
attempted to use the machine model 
to study the cell’s responses to viral 
action and the introduction of vari- 
ous drugs. 


The cyberneticians have built a 
veritable electronic zoo with “tortoi- 
ses”, “mice” and “dogs”. The pur- 
pose is to use the machines to study 
animal reflexes, how they appear, 
how they are reinforced. 

Let us meet some of the “old ti- 
mers” of this “zoo”. 

Here are the famous “tortoises” of 
the English engineer and psychiat- 
rist, Grey Walter. Their names are 
Cora, Elmer and Elsie. They were 
built with the specific purpose of 
providing a mechanical model of one 
of the primary properties of living 
creatures: the ability to carry on an 
exchange of energy with the environ- 
ment and alter that exchange in ac- 
cordance with changes in the envi- 
ronment. 

What can the “tortoises” do? They 
can sense and skirt obstacles. They 
can meet and part. They can even 
dance. 

How do they operate? 

The idea of the “electronic tortoise” 
is clever and exquisite, says the 
researcher. Imagine a_ photoelectric 
cell that generates electricity used to 
charge a small storage battery. If a 
lamp burns too long before the pho- 
toelectric cell a moment may come 
when further charging can damage 
the system. 

It becomes necessary to switch so- 
mething off, either the lamp or the 
cell. This is the system’s natural 
property, a condition for its fault- 
less operation. 

Now let us place the system on 
wheels, provide it with a motor and 
an automatic control unit which, 
working jointly and powered by the 
battery, will steer the system away 
from the light at the right time. And 
conversely, when the battery’s charge 


drops to a dangerous low level the 
control unit must steer the system 
to the light source to replenish its 
energy reserves. 

The most significant thing is that 
such a system does not require ex- 
ternal guidance and all its actions 
derive solely from its internal state. 

Mechanical rivals of Walter’s “tor- 
toises” are the “mice” built by the 
American scientist Claude Shannon. 

... A changeable aluminium maze 
made up of 25 cubicles: five rows of 
five. At one end is a “bait” in the 
shape of a metal rod. The model is 
activated, and the “mouse” starts 
crawling through the maze in quest 
of the bait. It encounters walls, turns 
from one cubicle into another, chan- 
ges its direction, trying to reach the 
“titbit” prepared for it by the re- 
searcher. And finally it reaches its 
goal. 

Now the “mouse” is let into the 
same maze for a second time. This 
time it doesn’t grope its way, blun- 
dering into walls, but easily, quicker 
than a live mouse, finds its way from 
one end of the maze to the other. 

When the “mouse” is placed in 
the part of the maze it hasn’t visi- 
ted before it again bumps into walls 
in search of the way. But as soon 
as it reaches the “familiar” road it 
quickly reaches its goal. 

A relay control system under the 
maze directs the “mouse” to make 
the right turns. The “mouse” is 
equipped with a pair of metal “whis- 
kers” with which it “feels” its way 
along the walls. It also uses a “me- 
mory” device to mark the passages 
along the route and to “block” ent- 
rances to corridors through which it 
had already passed. When the whis- 
kers finally contact the “bait” they 


CYBERNETICS IN BIOLOGY 914 


The vestibular mechanism is an example 
of feedback in the organism. 


halt the mechanism. Thus, the me- 
mory unit traces the shortest route, 
enabling the “mouse” to pass quickly 
through the maze on its second run. 

Obviously, the operation algorithm 
of the mechanical mouse is as diffe- 
rent from the algorithm of a condi- 
tioned reflex as the feet of a real 
mouse are from the wheels which 
carry the piece of hardware through 
the maze. 

Workers in our country have also 


D 


e— 


Saree NS 
ew 


RE tty 
\ &lt;&lt; ; 


THE ‘‘mouSE?? AND THE MAZE 


HE “‘TORTOISE?? AND ITS 
CIRCUIT 


Tt 


built a “mouse in the maze” device. 
Plastic lamina on the cover of a black 
valise form a fanciful pattern like 
leafless branches and twigs. A simi- 
lar pattern can be observed on the 
glowing wall panel of an automatic 
blocking system at which a railway 
dispatcher works. 

The plastic strips represent the 
tracks, the lights between them are 
the stations. There are 25 of them. 
Each one has its own switch. When 
it is flipped over one of the station 
lights flicks on. 

Now the thirteenth flicks on. We 
press a button and the strips repre- 
senting tracks flash on one after 
another. This is the light signal, 
which passes along the sidings on its 
way to the destination. 

Try and press the button a second 
time. All the lights on the panel go 
out, then the beam of light, bypas- 
sing the now unnecessary sidings and 
spare tracks, takes the shortest route 
to the thirteenth station. 

A red light glows at the left-hand 
corner of the panel. This is the me- 
mory indicator. It measures the time 
it takes the unit to memorize the 
route. 

Here is another representative of 
this unusual “zoo”: an _ electronic 
“squirrel”. It rides a platform dri- 
ven by a motor and is provided with 
two sensitive photoelectric cells, a 
filter that can distinguish between 
direct and alternating current, and 
other gadgets. 

The “squirrel” has two paws which 
it can cup together. It also has a 
little tongue with which it can “lick” 


CYBERNETICS IN BIOLOGY 93 


its cupped paws, and a metal tail 
which drags over the floor behind it. 

Here is how this little “animal” 
operates. Electric lights are burning 
in a big room. White beads are scat- 
tered over the floor. In one corner 
is a metal sheet lit by a daylight 
lamp, the “squirrel’s nest”. It is 
brought in and placed on the floor. 
The “squirrel” begins to move about 
the room until it spots—with the 
help of its photoelectric cells—one 
of the white beads. It turns to the 
bead, scoops it up, “tastes” it with 
its “tongue” and then turns to look 
for its “nest”. The electric filter 
enables it to steer towards the day- 
light lamp. 

When the “squirrel” mounts the 
metal sheet its tail closes a circuit, 
it opens its paws and drops the bead 
into its “nest”, after which it is 
free to continue its search for food. 

To be sure, all these “tortoises”, 
“mice”, “squirrels” and other “ani- 
mals” are very approximate models 
of conditioned reflex formation. But 
they have helped men approach a 
new stage in studying nature: inves- 
tigating organisms by the method of 
models. 

In biology not only organisms, 
but processes, too, are simulated. 
By building analogues of biological 
processes we can verify in practice 
the correctness of our theoretical con- 
structions and postulate hypotheses 
for experimental verification. 

Imagine a colony of living orga- 
nisms living in favourable conditions. 
Their numbers will change depending 
on their birth and death rate. But 


Electronic “animals” are used in the search for methods of studying organisms with the help 


of models. 


94 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


how, according to what law? The 
birth rate is affected by the available 
food supply, suppression by other 
species, life expectancy and many 
other factors. Scientists have built 
so-called abstract models and used 
them to establish the precise laws 


of development of organisms in cir-. 


cumstances of unlimited food supply 
and living space, in the absence of 
harmful species, and. in conditions 
of hunger, limited living space and 
harassment by predators. 

Such a model was used, for exam- 
ple, to help in growing penicillin 
fungi. They were fed abundantly, 
provided with ample space for 
growth and sheltered from predatory 
species. And the future harvest was 
predicted accurately by means of a 
special formula. 

Interesting facts are provided by a 
model of the stabilization of the 
number of two species, one of which 
is a predator with respect to the other. 
Running ahead, we can say that the 
“prey-predator” model offers mathe- 
matical proof of the usefulness of 
predators. 

Suppose we decide to destroy all 
the wolves so as to increase the num- 
ber of their prey—herbivorous ani- 
mals. The model revealed that anni- 
hilation of the predators may result 
in a brief burgeoning of the popula- 
tion of their prey, followed by a 
sharp drop and almost total extin- 
ction. And in fact biologists have 
observed a marked deterioration of 
herbivorous stock wherever wolves 
have been eliminated: ailing animals 
abounded, the offspring grew smaller. 
The wolves, it was found, performed 
a very useful function by destroying 
unviable animals. 

As you see, simulation of biologi- 


cal processes helps men gain an un- 
derstanding of the complex system 
of links between species and forecast 
the consequences of human interfe- 
rence in the affairs of nature. 

Nowadays biology, one of the ol- 
dest sciences which originated as a 
descriptive and experimental science, 
is boldly appropriating all of the 
latest from the arsenal of scientific 
means: cybernetics, mathematics, 
computers, methods of abstract ana- 
lysis, speculative reasoning and, at 
the same time, precise calculation. 

It can be said that we now wit- 
ness the emergence of a new biology, 
swiftly advancing thanks to numerous 
highly promising discoveries in mo- 
lecular biology, biochemistry, bio- 
physics, cytology and genetics, thanks 
to the appearance of new and unex- 
pected branches such as biostatistics, 
biomathematics and systems theory. 

Besides theoretical investigations, 
cybernetics in biology engages in im- 
mediate practical work. This is the 
other—applied—branch, which abuts 
on cybernetics in medicine. 

Naturally, it is hard to cover all 
the spheres of applied cybernetics in 
biology and we shall have to single 
out the principal targets of the “cy- 
bernetic attack”, the main directions 
of the “offensive”. 

Let us return once again to ma- 
thematical simulation. With the help 
of special equations one can describe 
the process of photosynthesis—the ab- 
sorption of solar energy—in plants. 
Scientists are working on mathema- 
tical models of such processes as the 
evolution of species, blood circula- 
tion, and others. 

There is another approach to ma- 
thematical simulation. With the help 
of a suitable analogue of the biolo- 


gical subject an experiment which 
could result in the death of an ani- 
mal or be hazardous to human health 
can be replaced by a computer cal- 
culation. Need we list the advanta- 
ges of such an approach? They are 
obvious. And the result? Superb, for 
a mathematical model takes minutes 
to show how a disease may develop 
in a patient, how a medicine may 
affect the body. 

As stated elsewhere, the basis of 
cybernetics is the collection and pro- 
cessing of information. Therefore, for 
the biological applications of cyber- 
netics it is important to build elect- 
ronic devices for assembling infor- 
mation about processes going on in 
the organism. Some remarkable su- 
persensitive, extremely delicate ins- 
truments capable of penetrating to 
the farthest nooks of the body have 
been invented for this: the electro- 
cardiograph for studying the functio- 
ning of the heart; the electroencepha- 
lograph which probes the mysteries 
of cerebral activity; the electromyo- 
graph which records muscle activity; 
tiny radio capsules for investigating 
the stomach and intenstines; electron 
microscopes; television microscopes; 
colour television in medicine, and 
so on, and so forth. 

In the course of an experiment the 
investigator is assailed by an avalan- 
che of data, figures, graphs. Many 
workers declare that the main dif- 
ficulty is not in staging an experi- 
ment but in the subsequent analysis 
of the information gleaned from the 
numerous devices in which modern 
biology and medicine abound. This 
is what makes automatic processing 
and analysis of assembled data so 
important. 

Interesting research in this field 


CYBERNETICS IN BIOLOGY 95 


is being carried out by workers of 
the Cybernetics Laboratory at the 
Vishnevsky Surgical Institute, under 
Academician A. Vishnevsky and Pro- 
fessor M. Bykhovsky. Work at the 
laboratory they say, has underscored 
the enormous difficulties encountered 
by aphysician confronted with the 
data supplied by various instruments. 
How can he assess the progress of a 
disease if the patient’s state is recor- 
ded in terms of several hundred cha- 
racteristics? He can hardly encom- 
pass, much less analyse them. 

Here is where the physician can 
be assisted by a machine capable of 
“diagnostic reasoning” on the basis 
of the data obtained and duly pro- 
cessed. The “Ural” computer, for 
example, is capable of compiling 200 
diagnoses of congenital heart disease 
a year. Moreover, the computer is 
more reliable than a physician, and 
on several occasions, when its fin- 
dings differed from those of the phy- 
sician, during the operation the ma- 
chine was shown to be right. 

With the progress in theory medi- 
cal diagnosing systems have been 
built capable of diagnosing not only 
heart defects but also diseases of the 
liver, stomach, some infectious di- 
seases, and tumours, including tu- 
mours of the brain. 

An important advance in medicine 
will be the development of an infor- 
mation system for amassing all per- 
tinent data, processing them mathe- 
matically and swiftly retrieving re- 
levant information about analogous 
disease cases. It would represent a 
vast medical “memory” storing the 
experience not of one or a dozen cli- 
nics, but of all the clinics of the 
country or even several countries. 
Any doctor in any country could 


96 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


then consult this central medical 
“memory”. 

Cybernetics has entered the surgi- 
cal operating room. It participates 
directly in operations and controls 
vital functions of the organism: looks 
after the work of the heart, regulates 
arterial blood pressure, controls ana- 
esthetic sleep. 

Cybernetics is confidently invading 
biology and medicine. In time its 
pace will become even firmer, its 


stride longer, its accomplishments 
greater. It is well to recall here the 
words of our celebrated physiologist, 
Ivan Pavlov: “The time will come— 
even though it may be a long way 
off—when mathematical analysis in 
combination with natural science will 
illumine all these equilibria [life 
from the simplest to the most comp- 
lex mechanisms—V.P.] with the ma- 
jestic formulae of equations.” 
This time has now come. 


D How to Find a Needle in a Haystack 


Mass documentation storage has on- 

DATA HANDLING ly recently developed as a technical 
system following the introduction 

of the ideas and methods of cyber- 

A branch of science that deals netics into the field of data handling. 

4 ‘ = ; It developed as a result of the pres- 
with the problems of automation ais. Generated by! the dvalanchond! 
printed matter that followed in the 
storage and retrieval wake of the scientific and technolo- 
gical revolution. Information is con- 
tained in scientific monographs, his- 
torical archives, libraries, museums, 
patent offices, in fact in every of- 
fice. It is recorded in books, news- 
papers, magazines, photographs, films, 
magnetic tapes, phonograph records, 
catalogues, advertisements, business 
reports, letters, files, etc. 

The storage, processing, retrieval 
and transmission of information have 
become a formidable task in our 
time. Little wonder that a veritable 
information industry, based on ele- 
ctronic computers and a wide range 
of other business machines, has ap- 
peared and has become a concept. 


of information accumulation, 


processes. 


Look What Is Happening. In forty years the All-Union Book Chamber 
has registered 22 million of all types of Soviet printed matter—almost one per 
every ten inhabitants, including babies. 

We have literally been flooded with printed matter. Annual output amounts 
to some 7000 million pages, about one-tenth of which is devoted to scientific 
information. 

In 1800 there were 100 scientific journals, and in 1950 there were almost 100 000. 
Today the figure is in excess of 200 000. 

Take a look at the field of chemistry. There are more than 6000 journals on 
chemistry in the world, and every day one or two new ones appear. In the 20 
years, from 1926 to 1946, the number of works on zinc alone was three times more 
than the total figure for such publications in the preceding 200 years. 

A chemist with a working knowledge of 30 languages (quite an implausible 
supposition) “swallowing” 20 articles a day without holidays would be incapable 


7—€16 


97 


98 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


of familiarizing himself with one-tenth of the publications appearing in perio- 
dicals on his specific field. And “swallowing” is not enough: one must also “digest” 
what one has read. 

The situation is hardly any better in mathematics, physics, biology and other 
major spheres of scientific progress. Experts have calculated that in the near 
future computers will be handling such a quantity of information that it will 
be equivalent to 7000 pages of reading matter per head for every man, woman 
and child in Europe. 

As for fiction, some are thinking of adopting the American way out: novels 
by Tolstoy, Stendahl and Dickens are compressed into 20- or 30-page digests 
that can be carried around in a coat pocket and read in two instalments when 
there is nothing better to do. How convenient, it would seem, yet .... 

Here is what Stephan Zweig had to say on this score: “Try and read a Dostoy- 
evsky novel in an abridged French edition. Everything seems to be there: the 
sequence of events unfolds faster, the figures seem more mobile, integral, impas- 
sioned. Yet they are somehow emasculated: their souls lack the same finish, the 
specific sparkle radiating all the colours of the rainbow, the atmosphere of glit- 
tering electricity, the oppressiveness of intensity which only a discharge makes 
so terrible and so salutary. Something is irretrievably destroyed, the magic cir- 


Schematic diagram of the “recycling” of scientific data among researchers. 


Receive 


Le A 


Intermediate storage 


scientific data 


written records 


DATA HANDLING 99 


cle has been broken. In these experiments in abridgement one realizes the mean- 
ing of Dostoyevsky’s breadth and the necessity for his apparent long-windedness.” 

It is better to read a thousand novels in the original or a good translation than 
to gain a distorted idea of a hundred thousand. But in science and technology 
the condensation of information into digests, abstracts or extracts is a must. 

In our country in 1952 an Institute of Scientific Information was set up under 
the Academy of Sciences. It has now expanded into a vast “concentration” mill 
for processing and enriching scientific and technical literature. 


The All-Union Institute of Scien- 
tific and Technological Information 
began publishing its journal of abst- 
racts in 1953. It presents brief synop- 
ses of articles appearing in 100 coun- 
tries on all the main branches of 
learning (mathematics, physics, che- 
mistry, etc.) and thereby substan- 
tially facilitates the work of not only 
Soviet scientists, but of foreign scho- 
lars as well. It receives publications 
put out by 450 foreign academies and 
scientific societies. Parcels arrive here 
from the British Museum, the Uni- 
ted States Congress Library, the Sor- 
bonne and a score of other major 
book repositories of the world. The 
Institute receives books and magazi- 
nes on science and technology pub- 
lished by all the publishing houses 
of the Soviet Union. In the course 
of a year more than 100 000 sources 
of information in 65 languages are 
processed. In 1960, for example, a 
total of 700 000 sources were conden- 
sed into reviews, digests, abstracts 
and bibliographical notes. 

The Institute has a staff of over one 
thousand workers supplemented by 
20 000 part-time collaborators. Ob- 
viously, the reviewers must not only 
know one or more foreign languages, 
they must also be specialists in some 
field of science. 

It would seem that with so many 
eyes keenly scrutinizing the press and 


7* 


so many highly qualified translators, 
not a single discovery or invention 
could escape the vigilance of probing 
researchers. Alas, this is by no means 
the case. 

In 1953 a description of an interes- 
ting technological innovation appea- 
red in the American press: replaceable 
tyre treads. Only in 1959 did Soviet 
specialists come across the report. 
A fortnight later the Yaroslavl tyre 
factory began manufacturing such 
treads, so simple was the idea. It was 
highly economical, but how much 
was lost owing to the six-year delay! 

American scientists have also been 
in similar situations despite their ex- 
cellent scientific and technological 
information service. It was once re- 
ported that one American firm spent 
five years and 200 000 dollars on a 
device which, it was later discovered, 
had been built in the Soviet Union. 
Furthermore, a report of the work 
had been published before the Ame- 
rican firm began to tackle the prob- 
lem. American industry first heard 
of Soviet turbine drills six or seven 
years after their development had 
been reported in the Soviet press. 
And this is not a question of negli- 
gence, rather it is a matter of mis- 
fortune, that engineers and scientists 
are increasingly incapable of coping 
with the mass of printed information. 

What must a scientific extract be 


100 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


like if it is to serve its purpose? 
Firstly, it must be brief and to the 
point: better to read the original pa- 
per than a verbose exposition of it. 
At the same time it shouldn’t be 
overabridged because, by its very na- 
ture, it must contain information 
that does not lend itself to abridging, 
such as formulae, dates, geographical 
names or names of investigators. Fi- 
nally, in our age of mathematical 
linguistics, bionics, space chemistry 


An example of a data retrieval system. 


DISS 


and other hybrid sciences, even nar- 
Tow specialists cannot afford to miss 
parts of papers dealing with adjacent 
sciences. Frequently the same paper 
is of interest to researchers in diffe- 
rent fields, for instance in chemistry, 
mathematics and biology. This means 
making three extracts from a single 
paper. But extracts are convenient 
as a source of information only so 
long as there are not too many of 
them. Yet already the annual output 


S35 
= ° 


Published 


of the Soviet institute alone runs to 
a thousand thick volumes. 

Incidentally, in 1965 some 1500 
journals of extracts were published 
all over the world. Yet even so they 
are no longer capable of encompas- 
sing the steadily growing avalanche 
of information. 

We are often fascinated by the 
wealth of the major world book reposi- 
tories. For example, the Lenin State 
Library in Moscow has 22 million 
volumes of books, journals and news- 
papers. Its total shelf length exceeds 
300 kilometres, and each year ano- 
ther 15 kilometres of shelves is added. 
But a large proportion of this wealth 
is no more than so much deadweight: 
about half the material in the Lenin 
Library has never been requested by 
readers. The reason? The same one: 
the files and catalogues are engulfed 
by the sea of printed matter. 

No wonder many scientists main- 
tain that if an investigation is not 
too costly it is cheaper to carry it 
out rather than hunt for a needle in 
a haystack in an effort to establish 
whether someone has or has not car- 
ried it out before. Indeed, “excava- 
ting” the paper deposits of American 
libraries, for instance, costs 300 mil- 
lion dollars a year. It has been esti- 
mated that one-fifth of the invest- 
ment in scientific research through- 
out the world is spent on gathering 
and distributing information. Yet 
most scientists spend perhaps one- 
third of their time on painstaking 
research in the quest of results al- 
ready obtained by someone else. 

We admire modern printing machi- 
nes, forgetting that whilst they have 
helped boost printing, they have not 
made pre-publication preparation any 
faster. The first Russian printer, 


DATA HANDLING 


Ivan Fedorov, spent eight months 
and nine days setting and printing 
his Instructive Scriptures. Four hund- 
red years later the 11th volume of 
the complete works of Charles Dick- 
ens, which required no editing, took 
eight months and twenty days to be 
published, and volume 30 took more 
than a year. For articles published 
in 1916 in the Journal of the Russian 
Physico-Chemical Society, the time 
lag between initial composition and 
final readership was two and a half 
months; in 1966 the time lag in the 
Journal of Physical Chemistry was 
19 months. And this at a time when 
the tempo of scientific progress is so 
fast that manuscripts can grow old 
in a few months! 

Such is the problem of information 
processing in only one department of 
data handling, the importance of 
which has not yet been fully reali- 
zed. The difficulties facing the in- 
formation industry are multiplying 
with every passing year. 

What are the prospects? 

It is cybernetics and electronic com- 
puterization that hold promise of a 
real revolution in the information 
industry. 

One of the problems is swift loca- 
tion and retrieval of all pertinent 
data on a given subject. Data ret- 
rieval systems are being devised to 
ensure the most rational organization 
and complete automation of the pro- 
cess. They employ microfilms, pun- 
ched cards and electronic computers. 
Such a system, for example, was 
developed in Moscow at the Vish- 
nevsky Institute of Surgery. In Kiev, 
at the clinic of thoracic surgery hea- 
ded by Professor N. Amosov, an archi- 
ve has been organized in which case 
histories are recorded on punched 


104 


102 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


cards. The information thus stored 
is intended for computer processing. 
Workers of the Cybernetics Institute 
of the Ukrainian Academy of Scien- 
ces are studying ways of transmitting 
medical data over distances in a di- 
gital and diagrammatic form. 

An “electronic encyclopaedia” is 
being assembled for chemists, and a 
data retrieval system on the mathe- 
matical theory of experimentation is 
being designed. 

Machines will make work easier 
for bibliographers. A machine was 
used to compile the index for the 
complete works of V. I. Lenin—55 
volumes. The job took several hours. 
It would have taken months if not 
years for a staff of manual special- 
ists. 

Another important problem is that 
of automating the process of trans- 
lation from one language into ano- 
ther. At present “manual” transla- 
tion from Russian into English emb- 
races only one-tenth of Russian scien- 
tific literature. Obviously, even une- 
dited word-for-word texts prepared 
by electronic translators would heip 
solve the translation problem. 

However, even if machines are 
able to translate all, or almost all, 
the printed matter appearing in the 
world, no hundred-eyed Argus could 
hope to read it all. That is why, 
from the practical point of view, the 
thing is to automatize not only trans- 
lation but the making of extracts 
too. This requires machines capable 
of not just choosing the equivalent 
foreign words, but of “understanding” 
the meaning of phrases as well. This 
is no simple task, but it is already 
being tackled. 

Today libraries make wide use of 
microphotography, which enables 


books and journals to be compressed 
into the size of a spool of film. Thus, 
a whole library or archive can be 
stored away in a single cupboard. 
Tomorrow’s microduplicating ma- 
chines will be capable of compres- 
sing the contents of a 30-volume en- 
cyclopaedia into the volume of a 
writing pad or even, some day, a 
pinhead! 

In response to telephone requests 
automatic machines will locate, ret- 
rieve and transmit information to be 
represented as an image on your home 
TV set. The first such experiment 
was carried out by Soviet scientists 
in 1957. The contents of several 
printed pages stored in the machine’s 
memory were transmitted through the 
city automatic telephone exchange. 
At the receiving end a screen presen- 
ted a clear impression of the prin- 
ted message. 

While progress in electronic micro- 
miniaturization holds promise of mar- 
kedly increasing the capacity of data 
repositories, achievements in laser 
techniques will help expand the handl- 
ing capacity of communication chan- 
nels for transmitting those data. The 
visible light wavelength range in 
which laser transmitters operate, has 
a capacity millions of times greater 
than the total range of wavelengths 
in which the sound and television 
transmitters operate today. Experi- 
mentally, light rays are being used 
as substitutes for telephone cables. 
At the Economic Achievement Exhi- 
bition in Moscow there is on view a 
TV installation which transmits both 
image and sound not by ultra-high 
frequency waves but light rays. 

Communications satellites will make 
it possible to establish a _ fast 
operating system of data exchange 


between libraries and publishers all 
over the globe. 

It is not accidental that already 
today men realizing the importance 
of coping with the torrents of printed 
matter and the flood of information, 
predict that soon “the day will come 
when paper will be replaced by elect- 
ronic impulses spanning vast distan- 
ces and processed easily by machines. 
The information service will develop 
into a stupendous system of machi- 


DATA HANDLING 


nes connected through communication 
channels to telephones, television sets 
and phototelegraph apparatus.” 

All these technological innovations 
will help the specialist of the new 
era of cybernetics—the data hand- 
ler—to chart routes in the boundless 
ocean of information. His main task, 
however, will be to curb information 
about information, to help scientists 
find their way in floods of news and 
avalanches of documents. 


“Don’t cry, dear, | 1) be back 
in a year!!! 


103 


104 


ENTROPY 


In the theory of information 
it is a measure 

of the uncertainty 

of the situation. 


The “Demon” Opens the Door 


Get ready to exploit your patience, 
for to understand entropy it’s pa- 
tience you’ll need most. Don’t ex- 
pect to grasp all features of this 
new concept at once. There is no 
need to wonder—many details per- 
taining to entropy are still open to 
discussion, there is no unanimity 
among scientists about them. 

Here are some statements by emi- 
nent scientists, acknowledged autho- 
rities on the question, who have tried 
to “crack the nut” in simple language. 

“The real value of the concept of 
entropy stems in the first place from 
the fact that the ‘measure of uncer- 
tainty’ expressed by it proves to be 
the characteristic which plays a part 
in various processes occurring in na- 
ture and in technology and correla- 
ted in some manner with the trans- 
mission or storage of information.” 
This is one statement. 

And now note the following: “To 
understand the meaning of entropy 
in the theory of information, you’ll 
better throw out of your head eve- 
rything that’s in any way connected 
with the concept of entropy as used 
in physics.” 

The third statement speaks of the 
difficulties of understanding entropy 
and the problem of entropy (in phy- 
sics and in information theory). 

“Walking through these fields re- 
minds one of walking through the 
jungle full of traps. Those who are 
best acquainted with the subject are, 
as a rule, most careful when talking 
Of It.” 

Let’s note: the scientists are una- 


nimous in stressing the connection 
between entropy and information the- 
ory. This is very important, since 
information theory has been accepted 
as a powerful research instrument and 
serves as the most reliable path-fin- 
der in excursions into the most so- 
phisticated labyrinths of numerous 
branches of modern science. 

That’s just an introduction, the 
story about entropy remains to be 
told. 

The word “entropy” was first used 
by the German scienti udolf-Clau- 
sius just over a hunare sears ago 
in 1865, when he explained why 
heat could not go over from a colder 
body to a warmer one. Translated 
from the Greek the word “entropy” 
means “I turn inside”, “I go into 
myself”. 

This aroused keen interest of the 
Austrian scientist Ludwig Boltzmann, 
and he decided to crack the problem. 
Far-reaching studies of this scientist 
resulted in the appearance in 1872 
of this definition of entropy. 

Let’s imagine a system, i.e. a gas 
enclosed in a vessel. What are the 
parameters of the system in this case? 
A definite volume, pressure and tem- 
perature—a set that is usually ter- 
med macrostate. 

But how did it come about? 
Through microstates: the positions and 
velocities of particles in certain mo- 
ments of time. These states change 
from one moment to another. A ma- 
crostate of a system corresponds to 
a set (a sum) of all its microstates. 
Evidently, one and the same macro- 
state may be the result of numerous 
sets of microstates, just as one and 
the same sum may be made up of 
various additives. A question may 
be asked: are all sets of microstates 


ENTROPY 


responsible for the same macrostate 
equivalent? No, they are not. This 
is what Boltzmann proved: a system 
free from outside influences (an iso- 
lated system) tends to become dis- 
organized, tends to increase its ent- 
ropy. At the same time, as is univer- 
sally accepted, the system “searches” 
for its most probable state. There- 
fore, according to Boltzmann, entropy 
may be regarded as a measure of the 
probability of a set of microstates. 
From physics we know that a system 
(to be precise, its macrostate) tends 
to equilibrium. Does that mean that 
microvolumes of the system, into 
which it may be subdivided, are in 
equilibrium every moment of time? 
No, such a set of microstates would 
be highly improbable, the more so 
the higher is the temperature of the 
system. A definite number of them 
(on the average) must every moment 
of time be a definite distance away 
from equilibrium. Thus, the macro- 
system as a whole has equilibrium 
macroparameters every moment of 
time (to be precise, the deviation 
from such parameters, while present 
always when the temperature of the 
system is above absolute zero, is re- 
latively very small), each given mi- 
crovolume has equilibrium parameters 
averaged over time, but every mo- 
ment of time the parameters of every 
microvolume are not equal to their 
equilibrium value. Each parameter 
may be said to oscillate around its 
equilibrium value. The amplitude of 
such oscillations is the higher the 
higher is the temperature of the system 
and the smaller is the microvolume. 

Maxwell’s “demon”—now a classi- 
cal example—too, will help us to 
understand this unfamiliar concept 
of entropy. 


105 


106 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The “demon” of the famous English scientist Clerk Maxwell made his home in 


dozens of specialized and popular-science books. The essence of the “demon” 
is, of course, the same in all books, only it is expressed in different words. 

To avoid retelling this example anew let’s take it in the form it was cited by 
the “father of cybernetics” Norbert Wiener. 

“Suppose we have a container filled with gas, whose temperature is everywhere 
the same, and suppose that some molecules move faster than the others. Suppose 
further that there is a small door in the container through which gas flows into 
a tube leading to a heat engine. and that the exhaust of this heat engine is by 
means of another tube connected through another door with the gas chamber. 
Each door is attended by a tiny being who watches the approaching molecules 
and, depending on their motion, opens or shuts the door. 

“The ‘demon’ lets through the first door only the molecules with a high velo- 
city and stops those with a low velocity. The task of the ‘demon’ at the second 
door is opposite—he opens the door only to molecules leaving the container with 
low velocity and stops molecules with high velocity. This results in the tempera- 
ture on one end of the container rising, and on the other falling.” 

To facilitate the understanding of the example with Maxwell’s “demon” Wie- 
ner proposes his own analogy: 

“Perhaps I will be able to clarify this idea with the aid of the example of a 
throng of people fighting their way into the subway through two turnstiles, one 
of which lets through people that move sufficiently fast, and the other those who 
move sufficiently slowly. Random motion of people in the subway will then 
assume the form of two streams—of fast-moving people from the first door and 
of slowly-moving people from the second. 


A simplified diagram of Maxwell’s “demon”. The molecules with long arrows move faster. 


ENTROPY 107 


“If both doors lead to a single passage with a treadmill on the floor, the stream 
or fast-moving people will rotate the platform in one direction faster than the 
stream of slowly-moving people will rotate it in the opposite direction (the flu- 
xes of “fast” and “slow” people being assumed equal). Thus we will be able to 
extract useful energy from random motion.” 

In other words the rotating door in the subway and Maxwell’s “demon” both 
are in a position to reduce the entropy of their “parishes”. So there is a contra- 
diction to be overcome: the “demon” reduces the entropy, which, according to the 
laws of physics, can only rise. A paradox, isn’t it? Yes, it is. And it remained 
so for a long time, until the Hungarian physicist L. Szilard published a paper 
under a very learned heading: “On the Decrease of the Entropy of a Thermody- 
namic System Due to the Interference of an Intelligent Being”. 

Here the scientist again mentions Maxwell’s “demon”. 

Why does he arouse interest? Firstly, because the “demon” can only act if 
he gets additional energy for his work—the opening and closing of doors alterna- 
tely to fast and slow molecules. Only by spending this energy can the “demon” 
keep his subjects “locked”, so that fast molecules stay on one side and the slow 
on the other. In other words, only then can the “demon” reduce the entropy of 
the system. But what does the “demon” spend the received energy on? 

On organizing activity, says Szilard—and proves it—trading energy for infor- 
mation as to where should definite molecules go. 

The proof presented by the scientist is very complicated and specialized. There 
is no sense in repeating it here. So let’s take his results for granted, all the 
more so, since they have been recognized by the scientists the world over. 


Hence the conclusion that infor- luation of information—in mathema- 


mation and entropy are interrelated. 
This is a very important conclusion, 
since it entails the proposition that 
information is inversely proportional 
to entropy. The famous American 
scientist Claude Shannon regards in- 
formation from this aspect: it is 
something that reduces the uncertain- 
ty of choice. 

Let’s recall Boltzmann’s micro- and 
macrostates of a system. There in- 
formation can tell us how, along 
what ways, the molecules move, 
help us to assess their motion. In 
the same way it is possible to assess 
any other category, difference in the 
meaning of letters, for example. This 
is the reason for Shannon to apply 
the formulae of entropy for the eva- 


tics the real meaning of the letters 
in the formulae is of no importance. 

This conclusion about the deep- 
rooted analogy between entropy and 
information was interesting enough 
for the famous French physicist Louis 
de Broglie to pronounce it “the 
most important and the most beauti- 
ful of ideas born out of cybernetics”. 
The leading authority on the theory 
of information, the prominent mathe- 
matician of modern times A. Kolmo- 
gorov says that “such mathematical 
analogies should always be stressed, 
since through concentrating attention 
on them progress of science is pro- 
moted”. 

You have certainly not failed to 
notice how careful the scientists 


108 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


le a ame te 
ta Vand. Vad 


Qe, ©, CL, © 
Fe Oe 


Vat, 
Y eres. a as es SSR 
+ 
fe te a Ol fe. % 


The entropy of a simple system of black 
and white balls occupying separate volumes 
in a box increases upon arbitrary shake-ups. 


themselves are when dealing with 
this question. They refuse to go bey- 
ond analogies. Why? Because the 
“characters” of the physical and in- 
formational entropies are quite dif- 
ferent, and this leads to a difference 
in behaviour. 

For instance, if the entropy of 
one of two bodies increases as a re- 
sult of their interaction this is al- 
ways at the expense of the other 


body. But this does not hold for 
information. As Louis de Broglie wit- 
tily remarked, “When I send you a 
telegram informing you of the down- 
fall of the ministry I supply you 
with information, at the same 
time I do not lose anything of it my- 
self.” 

A scrupulous and deep analysis of 
information and entropy was made 
by Norbert Wiener. He wanted to 
know the reasons for the interconnec- 
tion of information and entropy. The 
conclusion he arrived at was astoun- 
dingly simple: because both characte- 
rize reality from their own particu- 
lar point of view—both entropy and 
information regard the world from 
the viewpoint of relationship of chaos 
and order. Wiener states expressly: 
entropy is a measure of chaos, infor- 
mation is a measure of order. 

It can be said that at last the con- 
cepts of entropy in physics and in 
information theory became somewhat 
clear: one has been detached from 
the other, we know their “indivi- 
dual peculiarities”, their “traits of 
character”. 

But then one wonders whether there 
was any sense in drawing a line bet- 
ween these two concepts when now 
efforts are being made to merge them 
again. What is the content and where 
lies the necessity for this “step back”? 

For the answer to these questions 
let’s turn to the already familiar 
example of a container filled with 
gas. But this time the analysis will 
be made by another prominent scien- 
tist—Leon Brillouin. 

Again we have before us a gas- 
filled container. The gas consists of 
constantly moving molecules, and we 
simply do not know—cannot know— 
either their exact positions or their 


ENTROPY 


A tower built by man, a “purposeful physical system”, displays a high degree of order. As years 
go by, under the influence of random non-directional forces the tower will tumble and turn 
into a stone-heap—the entropy of the system will increase. 


velocities. But we know the macros- 
copic parameters of the system: its 
volume, pressure, temperature and 
chemical composition. Although we 
are in a position to measure all these 
parameters they tell us nothing about 
the behaviour of individual molecu- 
les or groups of molecules distin- 
guished by some characteristic (i.e. lo- 
cation in the container, velocity, etc). 
To gain information about this we 
must know more about the “inner 
workings” of the system, to be exact, 
about the interactions between the 
molecules, between the molecules and 
the container walls, which result in 
consiraints on their motion. In the 
absence of such information the only 
thing left to us is to assume that the 
molecules do not interact, i.e. are 
free, and the entropy of a free mole- 
cule of gas is the greatest possible. It 
follows that the less we know about 
the behaviour of the molecules, the 


greater is the uncertainty. Hence, the 
greater the probability of random 
states, the greater the entropy. 

True, it is not always that we are 
so helpless, don’t know anything about 
the system. Sometimes we do have 
a bit of information. For instance, 
about the history of the system, the 
moment of its birth. 

These are very helpful data—they 
are the key to other data such as 
the density and velocity distributions. 

Such additional information is of 
great value for us, for it enables a 
fuller description of the system to be 
made, which, in turn, makes it pos- 
sible for us to ascribe to it a smaller 
entropy. 

Does that mean that entropy may 
be regarded as a measure of lack of 
information, and information as the 
negative part of entropy, its “nega- 
tive”? It does, says Brillouin, and 
defines information as negentropy. 


110 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Does it make any difference what 
to call information—just information 
or negentropy? It does. The negen- 
tropy principle of information unites 
the concepts of entropy and_ infor- 
mation on a new basis and points 
out that they cannot be treated se- 
parately but must always be consi- 
dered together. And this rule is al- 
ways true for various infinitely dis- 
tant spheres of application—from 
theoretical physics to everyday life. 

Thus, the circle has been closed. 
We've read about Clausius who in- 


Tickets fora 
football match! 


vented the word “entropy” for the 
new concept, about Boltzmann’s theo- 
ry, linking entropy with the pro- 
bable microstates of the body, about 
the ideas of Wiener who identified 
entropy with the measure of chaos. 
Our road has been hard—from diffe- 
rence to unity. We learned about 
the responsible part played by ent- 
ropy in science, how it helped in 
the understanding of numerous laws 
of nature, and how recently theory 
of information “twisted” entropy and 
made science take a new look at it. 


111 


FEEDBACK 


The action 

exercised by the output signal 
of a system 

on its input. 


From the End to the Beginning 


His name was Humphrey Potter. 
His was, primarily, an active nature, 
and he couldn’t stand monotony. 
That’s why he got tired of the job 
he was doing in one of England’s 
mines: when water was being pumped 
Humphrey Potter opened and clo- 
sed the valves of a_ boiler. 

Why was he doing it? Just because 
two and a half centuries ago—that 
was the time when Humphrey lived— 
a boiler worked not as it does 
now. 

The steam from the boiler lifted 
the piston in the cylinder. Humphrey 
closed the steam valve and, at the 
same time, opened another valve to 
let cold water into the cylinder. 
The steam condensed, and vacuum 
was created. Atmospheric pressure ac- 
ted upon the piston, it went down- 
wards, transmitting its motion to the 
pump. After that Humphrey Potter 
opened and closed the valves in turn 
again, and so all day long. 

You’ll agree, this wasn’t an inte- 
resting job. And, naturally, he grew 
sick of it. The clever boy decided to 
get rid of it. He connected the val- 
ves by means of strings to the piston 
rod. As the rod went up and down 
the strings tightened and opened or 
closed the valves in appropriate se- 
quence. 

There are such specific concepts in 
engineering as “input” and “output” 
of a machine. The input of a steam 
engine is the steam inlet, and the 
output the motion of the rod. Now 
you can grasp the strictly scientific 
definition at the beginning of the 


112 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Regulating 
action 


Control system 


S 
262 
Ses 
Be 8 
ec 
GO 


(regulator) 


Regulator output 


A generalized diagram of feedback devices. 


section. When input is connected to 
output, feedback is realized. This is 
exactly what the legend attributes 
to the English boy Humphrey Potter. 
He invented feedback, devised a sys- 
tem for automatic regulation. 

Feedback is the cornerstone of mo- 
dern engineering. It’s difficult to 
name any of its fields where feedback 
is not utilized. Temperature regula- 
tors maintain the required tempera- 
ture. Pressure regulators—the pres- 
sure. Speed regulators—shaft rotation 
speed. Voltage regulators—constant 
voltage in the mains. 


Regulator input 


No matter where and when feed- 
back control is employed, it is al- 
ways very “attentive” and “punctu- 
al”. It performs all the operations 
entrusted to it with superhuman pre- 
cision. 

There are numerous examples of 
various automatic regulation systems. 
Their design, principles of operation 
and applications vary, but the inte- 
traction between the controlling de- 
vice—the regulator—and the object 
being controlled is of the same type. 


Here is a schematic diagram of the Watt governor. 
For almost two hundred years this mechanism serves as an example of elegance 


and simplicity of the feedback. 


Remember how James Watt built a steam engine with a centrifugal speed go- 
vernor driven from the engine shaft. The weights of this governor go apart under 
the action of the centrifugal force depending on the shaft speed. A moving sleeve 
is connected to the weights. Through a system of levers it moves the slide valve 
in the tube. The governor is tuned to the required number of revolutions of the 
shaft. If for some reason or other the shaft speed increases, the weights will go 


apart and pull the sleeve upwards, 
and the slide valve will go down- 
wards. The steam flow to the engine 
will decrease and the shaft’s rpm 
(revolutions per minute) will return 
to normal. If, on the other hand, the 
shaft speed begins to fall below the 
required value, the governor lifts the 
slide valve and more steam is fed 
into the engine. This, in turn, leads 
to the shafts revolutions being increa- 
sed to normal. 

The example of Watt’s engine has 
been used to demonstrate the outlines 
of a feedback control system. In this 
automatic regulation system the ob- 
ject regulated is the steam engine. 
The governor sends to the object 
being controlled a control signal by 
way of a lever system and the slide 
valve—this is a direct connection. 
The output of the governor acts upon 
the input of the object. Through the 


FEEDBACK 113 


Watt's 
elegance and simplicity of a feedback system. 


governor is an example of the 


vertical shaft that conducts feedback the governor receives from the engine a 
signal about the results of its control action. Now the output of the object “re- 
ports its behaviour” to the input of the regulator. This creates a sort of a closed 
circle, a kind of a communication circuit. 


Some specialists figuratively com- 
pare feedback with two dogs with 
grudges against each other. One of 
them, say, the black one, bites the 
tail of the white one. And the white 
dog, not willing to give in, bites the 
tail of the black dog. It’s the same 
closed circle process in which one 
dog plays the part of a feedback cir- 
cuit in respect to the other. 

Such feedback is called positive. 

In it the process of reverse action 
is intensified. Braking systems with 
external power sources may serve as 
another example of such a feedback. 
In these systems special devices are 
utilized that react to small displace- 


8—616 


ments effected by hand. The displa- 
cements are continued until the 
braking force reaches a value high 
enough to stop the moving machine. 

The feedback in which the inten- 
sity of the process decreases is called 
negative. This is the type of feed- 
back that is being predominantly 
used in automatic regulators, inclu- 
ding temperature level regulators, rpm 
regulators, pressure regulators, etc. 

Suppose the temperature in an elec- 
tric furnace has increased above the 
value required for the melting of 
metal. The automatic regulator acts 
“negatively”: it cuts power being fed 
to the furnace. If the temperature 


114 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


®) 


WrrTT2 


Positive feedback 
Negative feedback 


Types of feedback: in an internal combustion engine it’s a mechanical device; in a regenerative 
receiver it’s an electrical device. The regulators of liquid level and of temperature are feedback 


devices, too. 


decreases, it again acts “negatively” 
and increases the supply of po- 
wer. 

All further examples will add no- 
thing to the story about feedback that 
has just been told. We’ll always 
have to do with a regulator tuned 
to certain rpm or to certain opera- 
ting conditions which, in case these 
conditions are perturbed, sends a con- 
trol signal, the feedback delivering 


to the regulator a signal about the 
results of the control action. 

Cybernetics has widened immeasu- 
rably the domains of the feedback 
concept application which now inc- 
lude such “non-technical” sciences as 
biology and economics. 

The most intricate system employ- 
ing feedback is, presumably, the li- 
ving organism. What a lot of regu- 
lators and control objects it contains] 


How great is the number of inter- 
connected positive and negative feed- 
backs! What exceedingly difficult 
tasks the organism has to perform: 
distribute muscle strain in order to 
uphold the required body posture; 
react to the minutest changes of pres- 
sure in blood vessels; respond to the 
heat and the cold; watch the contents 
of acid, alkalies and many other 
substances; control the incessant work 
of the heart, the kidneys, the liver, 
the lungs! 

And the more complicated is the 
biology of the organism, the greater 
is the complexity and the variety of 
its “automatic regulators”. Feedback 


FEEDBACK 


may be said not only to take part 
in physiological phenomena, but to 
be absolutely necessary for the con- 
tinuation of life. Without it life is 
impossible! 

Thus, feedback is at work in quite 
different fields. This enabled scien- 
tists in cybernetics to talk about the 
universal, the general character of 
the “feedback” concept, to insist that 
it operates everywhere where inter- 
connected machines and systems form 
some new combination. These com- 
binations, these new systems must be 
harmonious, must retain former in- 
dividual features and at the same 
time gain new qualities. 


115 


1146 FORMALIZATION 


A detailization 

of the contents of subjects 
being studied 

enabling operations with them 
to be performed 

with the aid of mathematical 
methods. 


The Hard Core of the Matter 


Several ways, several methods may 
be used to describe the world around 
us. 

The works of ancient painters, the 
books of famous writers, musical 
masterpieces created by great com- 
posers—all are in the voluminous 
category the specialists call “the me- 
thods of description of the sensually 
perceived world”. 

The poet inspired by a fine winter 
morning expresses the beauty of it 
in verse. The painter overwhelmed 
by the power of revolutionary forces 
has his own way of expression: he 
depicts it as a brave powerful god- 
dess calling the people to glory. 

The assembly bell that rang in 
Russia on the days of popular feasts 
or popular disasters served as incen- 
tive for an oratorium calling the 
people to arise against foreign invaders. 


“Descriptions of the sensually per- 
ceived world”—that’s just what spe- 
cialists term the treasures of world 
literature and art together with the 
other less illustrious representatives 
of this category. 

Scientists are trying to gain insight 
into the peculiarities of the “method” 
used to describe the world around us. 
They try to do it scrupulously and 
fairly with the noble aim of establi- 
shing how the realities of life 
and nature are reflected by human 
senses. 

And what have they learned? What 
conclusions have they drawn? Out of 
all methods of describing real life, 
description by words is considered to 
be most flexible, sensitive and colour- 
ful. There’s no such thing as couldn’t 
be described by words, no such shade 
that couldn’t be expressed. 

The writer saw the sea. At the 
moment it looked extraordinary, there 
was something that distinguished 
it from what it looked yesterday, 
there was something individual in it, 
and he was impressed by it. And 
he wrote: “The sea smiled.” That 
was the way he saw it. 

But the word description, besides 
flexibility, abounds in traits that are 
subjective, personal. Only he, Gor- 
ky, perceived that “the sea smiled”. 
And is the statement that it smiled 
really creditable? . 

Scientists agree that word descrip- 
tion, being flexible and rich in co- 
lours, is at the same time subjective 
and of a “low degree of creditabi- 
lity”. 

There is another, quite the oppo- 
site approach to description of life 
and nature, when the colour of the 
sea and the play of light on the crests 


FORMALIZATION 117 


of the waves, and the foam on the chemical elements it consists of and 
beach are all ignored. Then the sea the physical equations describing the 
is described by the symbols of the intensity of the waves. 


Scientists themselves stress this aspect of the scientific approach when they 


say that science writes a thrilling novel about the hidden secrets of nature not 
in a colourful language that re-creates live association and bright images, but in 
its own language, in which everything that’s individual, subjective, is sacrifi- 
ced to the advantage of the abstract, the objective, the general. 

Every one of you, probably, paid attention to a newly built house. Storey ri- 
ses above storey, identical staircases, corridors, doors, identically planned, iden- 
tically arranged flats, one above the other—everything clear-cut, common, iden- 
tical. And now the tenants arrive. They arrange their dwellings each in his own 
way, and the formerly identical flats become different. A difference in furniture 
gives individuality to the flats. 

Roughly speaking, science deals with the “house” of nature itself, in its “unin- 
habited” state—with only such general regularities, such objective features, 
which unite objects perceived by us as different into classes and groups. 

Dry and rigorous schematic diagrams, graphs, formulae, tables, equations 
and symbols help to “unveil” essential features of the real world, to describe the 
“structure” of real life, to mark interconnections in nature. 

The difference between the scientific method of studying life and the method 
employed by art is very accurately expressed in the following words: while art 
makes us cry and laugh, science makes us understand and calculate. The pain- 
ter, the composer, the poet tell us about colours and sounds. The scientist “shuts 
his eyes” to the beauty of colours and to the symphony of sounds. From the colo- 
urs and sounds he extracts their main features, only that which makes a colour 
a colour, a sound a sound; the scientist reduces both colour and sound to waves 
(electromagnetic in the first case and elastic in the second) of appropriate length 
and studies their regularities. 

How does science study nature? What methods and what tools does it use? 

There’s a real arsenal of means of approach to the phenomena of reality. 

Remember the phrase you often used to hear from your teacher during biology 
lessons. “Tomorrow we'll start a new subject. We'll study the constitution of, 
say, the black cockroach” (or of the bombyx moth, or the nervous system of the 
frog). The example is unimportant, the important thing is that here we are 
up against the logical method of identification: “the study of the black cock- 
roach”, and not of black cockroaches, variously coloured, probably, with feelers 
of different lengths or with some other individual characteristics. In other 
words, you are going to separate the general, common to all, ignoring indivi- 
dual features. 

There are other ways of approach, as well. Idealization is one example. In 
this case scientists build ideal models of the objects being studied and deal with 
their general, essential features and properties. Exactly for this purpose the 
“absolutely black body”, the “absolutely hard body”, the “ideal gas”, the 


118 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


“absolutely smooth surface”, the 
“incompressible liquid”, etc., were 
invented. 

And here is a citation from an 
utterly scientific publication, from 
the “Collected Papers on. Crystal- 
lography and Crystal Physics” by 
Yu. Wulf. 

“The actual surface of the Earth 
with its incessant variations from 
highlands to lowlands is quite ir- 
regular. The impression of the 
shape of the Earth may be obtai- 
ned through the study not of its real 
surface, but of some theoretical sur- 
face. Thereby an element of abstra- 
ction from the actually existing 
irregularities is introduced into the 
concept of the Earth’s shape, i.e. 
the Earth is observed from a dis- 
tance sufficiently great to make 
these irregularities irrelevant. Such 
a method is quite valid, because 
the Earth’s radius is very large as 
compared with the highest moun- 
tains and the deepest ocean reces- 
ses, so that the presence of them 
does not alter the general ‘mathe- 
matical shape’ of the planet.” 

Scientific knowledge makes use 
of such simplification to ascertain 
hard features of the object under 
study, to detail its properties, to 
outline its contour, to discover its 
structure. In other words, no mat- 
ter what the principle underlying 
the gnostic method is, that of iden- 
tity, idealization, simplification, 
abstraction, it always, as you 
couldn’t fail to have noticed, 
involves “roughening”, “stripping”, 
“sharpening”, the stressing of the 
paramount, general, main factors. 


This may be assumed to represent the 
“formalization” of a house. 


FORMALIZATION 119 


A closed line Z drawn on the surface of a thoroid (a life buoy) will not necessarily divide this 
surface into inner and outer parts. 


Having gained knowledge by these methods, scientists proceed further. The 
regularities discovered by them, elaborated, specified and generalized, form the 
basis of scientific theory, which is accepted as ultimate knowledge the world 
over. Here’s what scientists themselves say: “A scientific theory is considered 
to be rigorous and precise if the elements constituting it (abstraction, idealiza- 
tion, identification, concepts, etc.) are sufficiently elaborate to enable a single 
set of rules of operation, i.e. rules distinguished by their formal character, to be 
applied. For this reason, the process of elaboration leading to such an operation, 
may be called the process of formalization.” In other words, it is a process (to- 
gether with its result) whereby some scientific subject undergoes such transfor- 
mations as would make the use of visual aids, e.g. sense organs or their exten- 
sions—the instruments—unnecessary. This is all the more true, because very 
often the sensory method fails, leads to errors. The definition of a non-intersec- 
ting closed line, moving along which we will return to the point of origin with- 
out ever passing any point twice, based on visual impressions, is one example. 
Visual impression gives rise to an obvious conclusion that such a line K divides 
a surface (a plane or the surface of a sphere) into two parts: inner and outer. There 
are such points A and B that cannot be connected by a line not intersecting the 
line A. However, here visual impression fails. The second definition is not equi- 
valent to the first, for it refers not only to the closed line, but includes, as well, 
the specific property of the surface on which the line K is drawn. Thus, a closed 
line Z (according to the first definition) drawn on the surface of a thoroid (a tire 
or a life buoy) will not necessarily divide this into outer and inner parts. 


120 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


There is no place for ambiguity 
where formalization has established 
itself. Maximum generalization and 
automatic manipulation with concepts 
are possible in a formalized branch 
of science. 

No matter what, when and where 
we formalize, the essence of the pro- 
blem is always the exposure of the 
“hard core of the matter”, without 
which a scientific theory cannot be 
developed. 

Remember our example with the 
house? Well, formalization is just 
the evacuation from the house of all 
foreign objects, doing away with 
the furniture and other things, once 
again “stripping”, “roughening”, an 
effort, so to speak, to “expose” the 
subject, to leave just the skeleton 
in order to draw precise and objective 
conclusions about it. 

But how should we “roughen”, 
“strip”, “expose”, i.e. formalize? Sci- 
entists give a clear and precise ans- 
wer to this question. One should 
begin with a finite inventory—from 
A to Z—of all initial elementary 
concepts used in the particular branch 
of science. Such an inventarization 
isn’t the work of one scientist, or 
even of one generation of scientists— 
this is the result of the long-time 
development of this branch of scien- 
ce, of a deep logical analysis of its 
structure, the inventory so complete 
as to leave out no essential concept, 
and so precise as to include no su- 
perfluous concept. 

But that is by no means all. For 
the process of formalization it is 
necessary also to construct a finite— 
from A to Z—axiomatic system. This 
is made up of sentences that include 
the main concepts from the inventory 
as definitions in the form of symbols 


rather than in the form of visual 
definitions. For example, this is how 
Euclid described a point: “A point 
is what has no parts.” This is a vi- 
sual definition, and is of no use for 
axioms, since the latter are senten- 
ces built of formulae (and not words). 

An axiomatic system obeys strict 
conditions, too. The first condition 
is that the system be free from con- 
tradictions. 

An axiom always states that 1=1, 
and not that 0=1. Next comes the 
condition of completeness. This means 
that every statement must either be 
proved or disproved. Another condi- 
tion is that of solubility, i.e. there 
must be a method of finding out 
whether a statement contained in the 
system is proved or not. Last comes 
the condition of independence—the 
system must contain no axioms that 
can be deduced from other axioms of 
this system. And another “must”— 
the logical system of rules of deduc- 
tion should also be stated. 

Everything we have been speaking 
about should be written in the spe- 
cial language of symbols. 

The thing formalization is called 
upon to expose, the “hard core of 
the matter”, is always capricious, 
evasive, hard to sense. And here the 
trouble only starts. The essence of 
the matter, even if discovered and 
exposed, requires elaboration as scien- 
ce progresses. See how the notions 
of the nature of light changed with- 
in arelatively short period of time— 
a little over one hundred years, from 
the 17th to the 19th century. At 
first it was thought that light is 
carried by light particles. They were 
called the photons. Later, again on 
the basis of scientific data available 
at the time, scientists came to the 


From the language of symbols. 


conviction that the origin of light 
lies in the corpuscle, and not in the 
photon. In the 19th century the ap- 
plication of the most modern methods 
of research brought about the electro- 
magnetic theory of light. And at 
last in the 20th century quantum 
mechanics established the duality of 
the nature of light: in some pheno- 
mena it behaves like particles, in 
others like waves. 

And here’s another example. The 
great German scientist Immanuel 
Kant, basing his arguments on the 
state of knowledge at the time, con- 
sidered the principles of chemistry to be 
purely empirical, purely practical “and 
therefore quite incapable of explaining 
possible rules of chemical phenomena 
since mathematics cannot be applied 
to them”. Kant doubts the ability 
of chemists to predict the course of 
a chemical reaction. The modern 
chemist has no doubts on this ac- 
count—a specialist in physical chemis- 
try is able to precalculate accurately 
numerous reactions with the aid of 
mathematical relations. 

Thus it turns out that formaliza- 
tion often comes to grips with a 
new situation in science, when for- 
mer methods of formalization beco- 


FORMALIZATION 


me insufficient, powerless, incapable 
of reflecting “the hard core of the 
matter”. The place of old methods 
is taken by new, more advanced ones. 
In this way formalization scales the 
stairs of progress. 

For this reason the progress in 
scientific knowledge at the same time 
manifests itself as a process of per- 
fection of the means of formalization 
used in the promotion of knowledge. 

Such a situation is quite normal. 
It reflects the essence of the process 
of cognition. It’s a specific illustra- 
tion of the law of gaining knowledge 
about the world and nature. 

To sum up, formalization is called 
upon to unmask the essence of the 
matter, contain all individual, un- 
reproducible features within strict 
bounds of logical and mathematical 
symbols. It, so to speak, tears out 
of reality only such facts as can be 
arranged into “rigorous systems”, “fi- 
nite inventories of concepts”. The 
impression arises that formalization 
is a product of “pure thought” of 
the mathematician. 

But this impression is utterly 
wrong: no matter how the formulae 
and the symbols look as though they 
exist “by themselves”, formalization, 


121 


122 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


which deals with them, is always 
and in every case a process of unmas- 
king the different aspects of the real 
world. 

Formalized science makes sense on- 
ly if it can eventually be applied in 
practice. Sometimes the time inter- 
val separating the creation of for- 
malized science and its application 
can be quite considerable—centuries 
or dozens of centuries, but still the 
practical issue of formalization can 
always be subjected to inspection. 
This is done with the aid of a metha- 
theory, for instance, with the aid 
of methamathematics. The latter stu- 
dies and controls the structure and 
properties of formal systems, regards 
them from the positions not of for- 
mal, but of substantial science. Me- 
thamathematics is interested in the 
substance, and not in the symbols. 

Nowadays people speak of formali- 
zation in a wide and in a narrow 
sense. In the narrow sense it means 
such an elaboration of the contents 
of the subjects being studied that 
enables mathematical operations with 
them to be performed. In the wide 
sense formalization is understood to 
mean the study of subjects, the ela- 
boration of their contents in accor- 
dance with the rules of formal logic. 
Formalization is the child of the end 
of the 19th century and the begin- 
ning of the 20th. So far it has been 
carried out—in the narrow meaning 
of the word—only in mathematics 
and mathematical logic, and, to 
some extent, in physics. 


self: the 


Some scientists presume, on the 
other hand, that its “embryo” ap- 
peared at the same time as language 
and thought. In their view the assign- 
ing of a name to an object can already 
be considered a kind of formaliza- 


' tion. 


An object receives a name for it- 
“sky”, the “bear”, the 
“stone”, the “water”, the “mountain”, 
the “food”, etc. This conspicuous pro- 
cess of assigning a name, so to speak, 
establishes the ability of the object 
to be distinguished from other ob- 
jects, underlines its stable features, 
its “hard core”. 

Later the written language appea- 
red. It gave mankind an extremely 
valuable means of storing and accu- 
mulating information. Step by step 
the natural languages were supple- 
mented by special signs, logical forms 
of thought came into being. Yet, 
such a mathematized science as cy- 
bernetics still, though it would seem 
strange, remains unformalized. Up to 
now there is no single generally ac- 
cepted logical definition of the con- 
tents of cybernetics, there is no in- 
ventory of its main concepts, no 
axiomatic system—all of which are 
indispensable for the formalization 
process. Of enormous importance in 
cybernetics is the formalization of 
mathematics and logic. It is because 
of formalization that mathematical 
logic could be applied in electronic 
computers which operate in accordan- 
ce with its laws. 


123 


G “Reds” Versus “Blues” 


GAMES THEORY No one can boast of having played 


all existing games—they are too ma- 
ny in number. Each game has its 
rules, its peculiarities. Hockey, for 
: ‘ ; instance, is different from football, 
with the aid of which hide-and-seek from cops and robbers, 
quantitative relationships the dominoes from naughts-and-cros- 
ses, the battle of ships from the word 
game, etc. And yet these different 
are established. games are identical in principle. 

Where does this identity lie? It 
lies in the conflict of interests. 

Basil and Pete play the battle of 
ships. Both want to win at all costs— 
that’s the conflict of interests. 

“One, two, three, four, five, I’m 
out to seek!” warns the one who 
seeks. His job is to find someone; 
those who hide must try to keep 
out of his sight. Again a conflict of 
interests. 

Two prominent football teams “Dy- 
namo” and “Spartacus” meet on the 
football field. One is to be the win- 
ner. There is no doubt that “Dyna- 
mo” is going to do its best. “Sparta- 
cus”, too, is not lacking in resolu- 
tion. A conflict of interests. 

A conflict of interests exists not 
only in games. It occurs often, much 
more often than we imagine. Just 
follow from this viewpoint the course 
of one of your ordinary days. 
How often have your interest come 
into collision with those of someone 
else! Situations in which different 
people have different interests and 
dispose of different means of attai- 
ning different goals are very frequent 
in everyday life. In other words, all 
of us come frequently across conflic- 


A mathematical discipline 


in conflicting situations 


124 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


ting situations. This happens so often 
that conflicts, collisions of interest, 
have been accepted as one of the main 
subjects of literature. 

We overcome a conflict when we 
play chess with a friend. 

A conflict is experienced by a child 
who in spite of his parents’ wishes 
stubbornly refuses to go to sleep. 

Conflicting is the situation of the 
vendor who, naturally, wants to sell 
dearer and the buyer who wants to 
buy cheaper. 

The confrontation of rival political 
parties during an election campaign 
is an example of a political conflict 
in capitalist countries. 

The conflict between the hare and 
the fox as biological species in the 
struggle for existence. 

Conflict ... we imagine it to be a 
complicated, sometimes personal, of- 
ten emotional and always a difficult 
affair. It is never easy to resolve a 
conflicting situation. Yet, modern 
mathematical science considers it fea- 
sible not only to analyse a conflic- 
ting situation, but even to “calcu- 
late” what line each of the rivals 
should take to attain his ends. 

Mathematics has its own approach 
to collisions of interests, and the 
men to exercise it are specialists in 
the theory of games. 

The first thing to do before the 
mathematical analysis of a conflict 
can be carried out is to clarify, to 
unveil the conflict of interests most 
rigorously, make them so clear and 
doubtless as in a game where even 
a layman sees who is on whose side. 

That is just what mathematicians 
do: they build a simplified model of 
the conflicting situation and call it 
a game. This model-game is played 
in accordance with certain rules. For 


the sake of simplicity and clarity and 
perhaps by force of habit the ma- 
thematical theory of games adopted 
the terminology of ordinary games. 
The partners in the game are called 
players, the result—the gain or pay- 
ment. 

True, the context of terms is some- 
what different here. In the theory 
of games several people with a spe- 
cified interest confronting one or ma- 
ny adversaries may be termed a play- 
er, the same term being applied to 
the adversaries. Thus a player is 
just one interest group. A football 
match from the standpoint of the 
games theory would be “calculated” 
as a game of one player against the 
other. In this respect it is not diffe- 
rent from a chess game. 

The prominent French mathemati- 
cian Louis Borelle already at the 
beginning of our century published a 
great many-volume Course of Theory 
of Probability and Its Applications. 
The last but one volume contained 
“supplements to games of chance”. 
Here the scientist summed up the 
results of his extensive studies of 
games of chance which interested him 
from the mathematical point of view. 
Borelle introduced into the theory of 
games audacious and original ideas. 
His predecessors considered only ca- 
ses where the course of the game was 
determined by chance and not by 
players. Borelle endeavoured to find 
a mathematical formula for the games 
which would take account of the 
proficiency of the players. In the 
course of time many scientists deve- 
loped the theory of games to such 
an extent that it became much wider 
than the theory of games of chance, 
and its results found extensive ap- 
plication. 


GAMES THEORY 
As is usually the case, the game is the main concepts of the games theo- 
very difficult to explain, it is much ry with the aid of one of numerous 


easier to show how it should be played. examples cited by specialists. 
And it will be easier for us to grasp 


Imagine two players A and B. Each of them independently of the other writes 


on a piece of paper one of the numbers 0, 1 and 2. Next they show the numbers 
to each other and add them up. If the sum is even, B pays A the sum of money 
equal to the sum of the numbers. If the sum is odd, the payment is made by A 
to B. 

The writing of the numbers and showing them to each other is termed a move. 
The premeditated choice of a system of moves is termed strategy. A player makes 
the decision: “In such conditions I shall act in this way.” And the gain of one 
or the other rival is, as you already know, termed payment. 

Let’s try to follow the course of the game. 

The results of all possible moves can be envisaged beforehand. A writes 0 (zero), 
B writes 0, too. The sum is zero, and nobody receives anything. A writes 0, B 
-writes 1. The sum is an odd number. A loses and B wins one rouble. A writes 0 
again, B writes 2. The sum is even. Now B loses and A wins two roubles. 

The same may be done with numbers: (1, 1), (4, 2), (2, 1) and (2, 2). It is easy 
to see that the number of possible combinations from which A and B have to 
choose independently is 3xX3=9. 

Let’s denote by A, the strategy of A when he writes 0, by A, when he writes 
1, and by As when he writes 2. In the same way we shall denote B’s strategy 
by B,, Bz, B;. All possible gains and losses (gains with the minus sign) 
can be summed up in a table. 

The table containing gains and losses of the rivals resulting from the applica- 
tion of all possible strategies is termed payment matrix, and the game itself a 
matrix game. 

What does an analysis of the payment matrix yield? To begin with, player 
A must expect player B to be sufficiently clever to evolve a strategy which would 
minimize the gain ofA irrespective of the latter’s strategy. Next, 4 must choose 
such a strategy that will guarantee him the maximum from the minimum 
gains. Such a strategy for A is to continue writing 0. In this case his loss will 
never exceed 1 rouble. 

Likewise, player 6 will also choose a strategy which promises him minimum 
losses. To arrive at it we should look through the columns of the payment mat- 
rix and find the minimum gain of A. 

The gains of A and B are written underneath the table. 

The goal of the theory of games is to evolve recommendations for each of the 
rivals as to their tactics in the game. With the aid of these mathematical recom- 
mendations the rivals can choose the best (optimum) strategy that would guaran- 
tee them best results in the game. True, one strategy is practically never used 
throughout. The partners frequently change strategies, and they become mixed. 

But notwithstanding the course of the game or the changes in A’s and B’s stra- 
tegies the rivals always strive to act against one another; their interests are al- 


125 


126 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Gains 
Losses 


Entries 


The strategies of the players A and B and the payment matrix. 

ways clashing. A strives at the maximum from the expected gains (this is ter- 
med maximim); B, in his turn, wants to minimize the maximum sum he will 
have to pay A (this is termed minimax). = 

As you can see, the main aim of the player is to get maximum gain at the ex- 
pense of his artful rival, who is determined to beat him. This means that the 
player wants to win but at the same time cannot count on his rival to make an 
error. The player knows that no matter how good his strategy is his adversary 
cannot fail to make the best response. For this reason, when calculating payments 
the player counts on the worst he can get. 

But how to assess quantitatively how much one of the partners (both so accu- 
rate, so free from emotions, incapable of mistakes and capable of logical reaso- 
ning) is going to win? This is fairly easy. For every game there is a definite pay- 
ment that a good player receives from another good player. This payment is cal- 


GAMES THEORY 127 


led the price of the game. This price limits the gain: we can never win more than 
the price of the game, if our rival makes no mistakes. 

Correspondingly, if we do not make mistakes, our loss will not exceed the price 
of the game. Which one of the rivals is going to receive the price of the game, 
and which one to pay it, depends on chance. Such chances in most games of chance 
for two perfect players are fifty-fifty. There are also games where nothing is left 
to chance, i.e. the initial conditions are strictly identical for both players. There 


the theoretical result is always a draw. 


With this aim in view let’s analyse 
another simple game with two adver- 
saries and two strategies. The sym- 
bolic term for it is “the bombing 
mission”. Suppose that two “Blue” 
bombers are sent on a mission. One 
carries bombs, the other radar jam- 
ming equipment, various equipment 
for the assessment of damage, etc. 

The bombers fly in such a formation 
that the first is better covered by 
the guns of the second than the se- 
cond by the guns of the first. There 
is the danger of the bomb-carrier 
being brought down by a “Red” fight- 
er—there’s only one fighter, and it 
can make only one attack before the 
bombers reach their target. The pro- 
blem is which plane should carry the 
bombs—the first or the second, and 
which one should the “Red” attack, 
i.e. what should both adversaries do 
to achieve best results. 

The following strategies are open. 

“Blues”-1—the bomb-carrier in in- 
ferior position. 

“Blues”-2—the bomb-carrier in su- 
perior position. 

“Reds”-1—attack the bomber in 
inferior position. 

“Reds”-2—attack the bomber in 
superior position. 

Suppose, the chances of the bomb- 
carrier to survive are 60 out of 100 
if it is attacked in the inferior posi- 
tion, 80 out of 100 if it is attacked 


in the superior position, and 100 if 
it is not attacked at all. 

Let’s write it out as it is usually 
done in the theory of games—in the 
form of a matrix. 

Naturally, the “Reds” and “Blues” 
will have to change their strate- 
gies. It has been calculated that for 
every 20 cases of the first strategy 
there would be 40 cases of the second. 
Hence, the “Blues” should in the 
ratio 40: 20 favour the covered po- 
sition of the bomb-carrier. The same 
ratio (40:20) should hold for the 
“Reds” in attacking the covered bom- 
ber. 

Now we can calculate the price of 
the game for the “Reds”, i.e. the 
chances of the bomb-carrier to reach 
its target: 


20 x 60 +740 « 100 


—— 26 
20 + 40 = 865 % 


And now after tiresome logical rea- 
soning read about a scandal that 
took place some years ago in Europe’s 
casinos. 

At first no one paid any attention 
to them. These young men strolled 
into casinos to watch roulette being 
played. They stopped at green tab- 
les and entered winning numbers in 
their notebooks. When asked for their 
motives they answered: “Just so, for 
the fun of it.” 

Two months later a storm swept 


128 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


~ 


of the use of strategies 


Y} Bl 
40) 


Relative frequencies. 
of the use of strategies 


by the "Reds" 


The game under the code name of “The bombing mission”. 


over Monte-Carlo, this capital of ca- 
sinos. The same young men came 
back. But now they ceased taking 
down numbers and started playing 
themselves. And they did it wi- 
thout losing. Marvellous! Unexplainab- 
le! 

The journalists started looking for 
an explanation. And they think they 
found it. It appears the young men 
wrote down winning numbers, these 
strange arrays of numbers, not for 
fun. Moreover, they encoded them 


and sent them over to their compa- 
nion in London. The latter fed them 
into a computer. Evidently, the com- 
puter managed to do something that 
was beyond the power of man: ha- 
ving processed some millions of num- 
bers it guessed several accurate win- 
ning combinations. 

True, many specialists maintain 
that this could happen only if the 
roulette had some constant defect. 
But even if this was the case, it was 
not known either to the owners of 


the casino or to the people who took 
part in the calculations. 

What was the amount of calcula- 
tions the computer had to perform? 
This is not known. But some other 
facts are. One American mathemati- 
cian calculated that in order to find 
winning combinations in the pip card 
game one would have to analyse 34 
million card combinations. True, this 
is beyond man’s faculties, but the 
eager-to-win mathematician got hold 
of a computer. He set it to work on 
a 10 thousand man-hour programme, 
and the computer calculated some 
“guaranteed to win” combinations. 

In the “American case” the compu- 
ter programme (algorithm for the 
search for combinations) was aimed 
at increasing the chances of a favou- 
rable outcome of the game, and to 
achieve it the computer tested moun- 
tains of numbers basing its play 
against an imaginary rival on the 
rules of the theory of games. It will 
be reasonable for you to remark that 
there wasn’t much sense in creating 
a new branch of mathematics just 
to help people win in the games of 
chance. Of course, the theory of 
games wasn’t created for the sake of 
this (let’s note, by the way, that for 
such games as roulette and lotto there 
doesn’t exist a programme of ac- 
tion which would always give a strict- 
ly definite winning strategy). 

Games of chance, models of games 
play the part of guinea pigs which 
serve to test much more important 
problems of the theory of 
games. 

Specialists in cybernetics try to 
evolve with the aid of the theory of 
games a rational line of conduct for 
all sorts of systems struggling against 
some other system. 


9—616 


GAMES THEORY 
What do we mean by the struggle 

of one system against another? Exam- 

ples are manifold in different fields. 


For instance, the theory of games can. 


be adapted for military communica- 
tions’ purposes, to anti-aircraft de- 
fence (of course, the problems there 
are much more complicated than the 
problem of the bombing mission that 
has been solved above), to problems 
facing a commander in action. 

The work of an experimenter who 
draws up a programme of action—a 
plan of experiments—too, can be con- 
sidered from the viewpoint of the 
theory of games. 

The experiments may be conside- 
red to be a game between the scien- 
tist and the nervous system of the 
animal which he studies. 

The economist planning the work 
of a producing plant “plays” against 
the moves of his “adversary”—the 
consumer. 

In some respects the relations of 
the sides (for example, in the court} 
can be considered to be a game in 
which the rivals strive to attain op- 
posite aims. 

And in most cases in the games 
we have to operate with numbers 


and numbers again, to perform a 
maddening amount of  calcula- 
tions. 


So it’s not just by way of chance 
that computers are being taught to 
play different games: dominoes, che- 
quers, fifteen and, of course, chess. 
Chess, boasting of an astronomical 
number of variants of the game— 
some 2-10118!—open up a wide scope 
for research. 

The computer match between the 
American and the Soviet chess pro- 
grammes continued for a whole year. 
The scientists attached great impor- 


129 


130 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


tance to computers’ skill displayed 
in the match, since the solution of 
some complex probleris in the theory 
of games depended on the “chess- 
playing talents” of the computers, 
i.e. on the programmes compiled by 
the mathematicians, and this, in turn, 
could help in the solution of impor- 


IS 
St 
‘| 


xe 


tant scientific, industrial and mili- 
tary problems. 

Now you see why the mathemati- 
cians play the “Reds against Blues” 
game on paper and teach electronic 
computers to play various games with 
expert skill, so that they would make 


an experienced top-grade rivals. 


H 


HEURISTICS 


The science 
that studies the laws 
of creative activity. 


Why This Way and Not That? 


It’s easy to guess that the science 
of heuristics derives its name from 
the world-famous exclamation of 
Archimedes: ‘“Eureka!”—“I have 
found!” 

What does this science study, 
what’s its subject? 

It studies creative activity. A man, 
teferred to as creative, creates 
something personal, something diffe- 
rent from what others have done: he 
composes symphonies, writes poems, 
paints pictures, makes scientific ex- 
periments and inventions. 

Though the validity of such a con- 
cept of creativity is not to be denied, 
it is, as yet, too limited. To think 
of it, a doctor prescribing a cure to 
his patient solves his problem crea- 
tively. A detective investigating a 
crime also uses his creative abilities. 
A turner thinking of the way to 
improve the cutting tool for his lathe 
formulates a problem to be solved 
creatively. 

Thus, the term creative activity 
should be taken to mean such a way 
of thinking which gives man a new 
system of action; makes him act in 
a new manner; discloses laws of na- 
ture previously unknown; makes 
man search for new information in 
order to use it. 

Heuristics strives to penetrate into 
the secrets of creative activity, dis- 
close ‘technological methods pe- 
culiar to creative process, formulate 
its laws. It was by a step-by-step 
process that people came to underst- 
and the essence of creative, or as it 
is termed by specialists, heuristic, 
activity. 


134 


{32 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Previously it was assumed that 
there were no methods in such activi- 
ty, it being a matter of inspiration. 

But as the laws of thinking were 
established people began to discern 
the basic principles of creativity, 
and to try to find ways of explaining 
this interesting and sophisticated phe- 
nomenon. 

At first scientists presumed that a 
whole crop of associations springs up 
in the mind, and they determine 
the creative ability. 

But it was soon understood that 
associations cannot account for new 
previously unknown solutions. A more 
complete and accurate explanation 
was to be found. The result was the 
trial-and-error method. In essence the 
method consists in obtaining a solu- 
tion through a series of probes, the 
erroneous probes being discarded. 

Then came the turn of another 
trend—“Gestalt-psychology”. | Here 
the conduct of a man, his activity, 
is determined by his vision of the 
interconnection of elements in the 
problem to be solved. 

These were not the only trends in 
the efforts to explain the nature of 
creativity. Neither individually nor 
collectively could they present a clear 
picture of this marvellous faculty 
of man. 

With the appearance of cybernetics 
it was natural to apply its approach 
to problems of creativity. 

The main questions of interest to 
specialists in cybernetics were: 
what is thought; what are the pe- 
culiarities of creative forms of brain’s 
work; how does the brain arrive at 
new solutions? 

Electronic computers were of major 
help in solving these problems. They 
enabled the study of heuristic acti- 


vity to be made with the aid of 
models. A prominent place among 
these belongs to chess, which is 
truly the acid test for modelling 
thought. This is because chess is 
rich in conditions and possibilities— 
the number of possible combinations 
of figures on the 64 squares of the 
chessboard is too great to be ima- 
gined—2.- 1018, 

In cybernetics every position of 
chess figures is presumed to corres- 
pond to a cross-point of a labyrinth. 

Why make a labyrinth out of chess? 

Let’s first recollect a funny epi- 
sode from Jerome K. Jerome’s book 
Three Men in a Boat about Harris 
in the Hampton-court labyrinth. 

“We'll just go in there, so that 
you can say you’ve been, but it’s 
very simple. It’s absurd to call it 
a maze. You keep on taking the first 
turning to the right. We’ll just walk 
round for ten minutes, and then go 
and get some lunch,” impeached Har- 
ris his relative. 

But, alas! Not only did he lose 
his way, but he led astray people 
whom he undertook to help out of 
the labyrinth. 

In accordance with his tactics Har- 
tis always took the right turn. Time 
went by as the party under his lea- 
dership sought in vain for the exit 
from the labyrinth throughout the 
morning. Even when they changed 
their tactics—now they turned in- 
discriminately—all their ways brought 
them back to the centre. This 
continued with such regularity that 
some members of the party simply 
stayed where they were and waited 
until the rest returned after their 
stroll. 

Poor Harris didn’t know as he 
strayed from one crossing of the la- 


byrinth to another that thereby he 
was demonstrating the use of the 
creative method of trial and error 
and that if he could try out all 
possible ways he would solve the 
problem. But here the limit is set 
by time, and this, of course, will 
exceed ten minutes allotted for the 
purpose by Harris. 

So, if all the variants of “in-out” 
ways are tried out, the problem will 
be solved. 

And now see if you can try out 
all ways of a labyrinth with 2.1046 
crossings. 

This is why “test possibilities” of 
chess are so attractive for specialists 
in cybernetics. Naturally, man doesn’t 
try out all variants—he makes use 
of some other methods to cut short 
the way to solution. 

Nowadays specialists in cybernetics 
try to rise above the simple “try-out” 
method and to approach the creative 
method of solving problems. This 
they try to do with the aid of 
heuristic programmes. The name 
speaks for itself. Computer program- 


HEURISTICS 


mes were based on the results of the 
studies of the process of problem 
solution—of heuristic activities—of 
man. 

According to the authors of the 
new method, the task before them 
arose “mainly out of the desire to 
understand the essence of complex 
transformations leading to the suc- 
cessful solution of problems. For 
instance, it was our wish to underst- 
and how the mathematician arrives 
at the proof of a theorem not know- 
ing from the start how to solve the 
problem or even if he will be able 
to solve it at all”. 

The most important thing in a 
heuristic programme is the strategy 
of the search for solution. 

The computer working to a progra- 
mme assesses the results of inter- 
mediate operations and accumulates 
in this way additional information. 

Heuristic programmes discard se- 
arch variants which do not promise 
success and concentrate on searching 
for a solution in the directions where 
such a solution exists. 


Here is a diagram of a labyrinth and its crossings. It will serve as an introduc- 


tion to one of heuristic programmes called “the universal problem solver”. 

The solution of the problem of exit from the labyrinth by the “try-out” pro- 
gramme would involve the testing of all variants —even those that are known to 
be senseless, such as walking around a crossing. In heuristic programmes chance 
elements are also present, such as arrival at a “good” crossing by chance. 

To cut the number of crossings (or ways) being tried out “the universal pro- 
blem solver” makes use of the terminal crossing of the labyrinth-problem and 
of the distance to this terminal crossing. 

The computer begins its work according to programme by testing variants 
issuing from the entry. The testing continues until the programme reaches a cross- 
ing nearest to the terminal. In our diagram we denote such a crossing by By. 
Then testing begins anew and results in a new jump—nearer to the terminal. 
Now our programme has reached the crossing C;. New tests, followed by a new 


133 


134 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


9 
AN 


5 


B, 


oO 
‘‘ 


Ny 


Vhe, 
a e © 
D; = “eg &amp; 
SS 
Ss 


i 


A. diagram of a labyrinth and its crossings. 


jump. And so on until in the course of some test the programme reaches the ter- 
minal D,. Thus the last jump leads to a successful solution of the problem. 

Have you noticed that “the universal problem solver” divides a problem into 
several simpler problems? That’s what makes it different. 

But have you noticed as well that notwithstanding the difference of heuristic 
programmes from simple “try-out” programmes the test method still plays a 
big part in the “universal problem solver”? So it turns out that the computer 
can tackle such problems only because it works very fast. A man working much 
more slowly (a hundred, or a thousand times slower) can, on the other hand, 
successfully solve problems of the “chess type”. 

This conclusion makes some specialists cast doubt on the universal validity 
of heuristic programmes. In their opinion creative heuristic activity of man can- 


not be attributed merely to heuristic 
programming which helps to cut down 
the number of possible variants. It’s 
more probable that man works out his 
strategy on the basis of a quite 
different process. 

What is this process? 

Let’s return to chess. A position in 
the middle game can be taken as the 
entrance to the chess labyrinth and 
mate as the exit. Hence there are 
numerous entries and exits in chess, 
and the number of ways leading from 
each entry to each exit is so great 
that in testing variants one runs into 
gigantic numbers. 

Some interesting experiments with 
chess have been carried out at the 
Institute of Psychology of the Academy 
of Pedagogical Science. They lead to 
the assumption that heuristic activity 
of man is based on the construction 
of situation models. For instance, 
looking at a complicated chess posi- 
tion man of all the figures chooses 
only those the interconnection of 
which is to be established. Thereby 
he at a stroke discards many moves 
and shortens his “wandering through 
the labyrinth”. In this way man for- 
mulates his strategy of behaviour arri- 
ving through the models of individual 
elements at the situation as a whole. 
In other words, the crux of the mat- 
ter is how the man sees the whole 
problem and the individual elements 
of the problem. 


The diagram at the top depicts the movements 
ofa chess-player’s eyes when he tries to me- 
morize the position. Below are the move- 
ments of the eyes of a chess-player solving 
a chess problem. 


Loo ag 


HEURISTICS 135 


oa 


136 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


It is true that up to now heuristic 
programming has, too, failed to di- 
vulge completely the mechanisms of 
human creative activity. But a great 
stride forward in this direction has 
been made: new programming prin- 
ciples have led to the idea of study- 
ing the work of the brain on a new, 
intermediate level—on the level of 
information processes. This will make 
it possible to link information pro- 
cessing with the physiology of the 
brain. 

This method has been compared 
to the method, used in chemistry, 
of decomposing complex chemical 
compounds into simple elements. 

Heuristic programming and heu- 
ristics as a whole are of special im- 
portance for the progress in electro- 
nic computers. Before the advent of 
heuristic programmes electronic com- 
puters were able to solve only pro- 
blems rigorously limited by mathe- 
matical description. Now it appears 
possible to solve problems devoid of 
such a description. 

From the point of view of heuris- 
tics modern electronic computers have 
many deficiences: they are straight- 
forward, unintelligent, inflexible, not 
clever, etc. 

The role assigned to heuristic pro- 
grammes is to find means of making 
the computer sharp and clever, ca- 
pable of finding its way in an unex- 


pected situation. This was the idea 
behind the famous “electronic” chess 
match between the Soviet and 
American computers which took place 
in 1966-67. 

American scientists in all games 
adhered to a single heuristic pro- 
gramme. Soviet scientists used two pro- 
grammes—one simplified, another, in 
their opinion, more sophisticated. This 
opinion proved right—the second So- 
viet programme won. 

This match right from the start 
took on the character not of a sports 
game, but of comparing scientific 
ideas. As is often the case in cyber- 
netics, chess was used to test the 
principles of heuristic programming 
with the aim of increasing the capa- 
bilities of computers in a wide field 
of their application. 

Look at a modern computer centre. 
Even in such a highly automated 
plant many preliminary operations 
are made “by hand”. Heuristic pro- 
grammes will put an end to this. 
The possibility will become real of 
going over from partial automation of 
“white collar” work to full automation. 

In the opinion of specialists, the 
use of heuristic programmes in me- 
dicine, transport, astronautics, phy- 
siology and neurophysiology, produc- 
tion control and many other impor- 
tant fields of science and technology 
will be very effective. 


IDENTIFICATION 
OF IMAGES 


The theory and principles 

of systems 

capable of recognizing objects, 
phenomena and situations 

and of grouping them 

into images. 


137 


What Is What? 


Nobody wonders at one of the most 
marvellous faculties of man—the abi- 
lity to recognize objects. No sooner 
have we seen, than we already know 
what is before us: a ship, a_ but- 
terfly, a cup, an elephant, etc. We 
recognize it instantly and unerringly, 
be it the object itself or its reduced 
or enlarged image. 

This amazing faculty is no wonder 
to us; its loss, on the other hand, is 
considered to be unnatural, to be a 
symptom of a malady.... 

We live surrounded by images—by 
phenomena, by objects, by situations. 
When we perceive them we always 
combine similar images into groups— 
classify them. Frequently groups of 
similar images contain quite diffe- 
rent objects, but something in them 
must be similar, some of their basic 
principles must be identical. 

Let’s take ABC letters as an exam- 
ple. No matter in what “difficult” 
handwriting they may be written, we 
shall always recognize the letter “y” 
as the letter “y”, the letter “d” as 
the letter “d”, the letter “z” as the 
letter “z”. 

Or let’s compare two quite diffe- 
rent drawings: a human portrait drawn 
by an artist and a picture drawn 
by a child. The difference is stri- 
king, yet there is a likeness as well: 
nobody will be in doubt that both 
artists—the grown-up and the child— 
have depicted a man. 

These examples will suffice. You 
may say that all this is evident and 
does not need explaining. 

Evident? Is it really so? 


138 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Shift in height and/or width 


Linear geometrical 
variations 


Non-linear 
geometrical 


variations 


Grade variations 


Variation in 
the structure — variation 
of the sign 


Rotation Scale variation 


Contrast Background Pollution 
variation and damage 
of the digit 


We call all the figures shown at the top the letter “A”, despite the great difference of shape. 
Any sign of the written language—a letter or a digit—may experience all sorts of distortion 


in the course of writing. 


Man‘ has the faculty of recognition 
from time immemorial. And yet, up 
to now scientists have not found 
out how he does it. How does he ma- 
nage on the basis of barely percep- 
tible signs and frequently incomplete 
characteristics to construct in his 
brain the concept of an image? Of 
the image that plays a major part 
in his perception of the surrounding 
world and in the processes of its 


cognition and revelation of its secrets. 

And here again we encounter a 
paradox—one of many that spring 
up when we deal with the riddles 
of human brain, of human mentality: 
scientists don’t know how man builds 
up an image, but they know the va- 
lue of this faculty. They maintain 
that the perception of actual pheno- 
mena in the form of images enables 
the memory to be used more sparin- 


gly. This is because the image makes 
it unnecessary for us to remember 
innumerable concrete objects and phe- 
nomena. The image, in particular, 
enables us to make use of accumula- 
ted experience. 

Scientists state authoritativety that 
without the ability to group objects 
into images we would be puzzled 
by every new phenomenon (just like 
the electronic computer), since no 
object, no phenomenon is an exact 
repetition, a precise copy of those 
we met before. 

How do we acquire this faculty, 
the value of which can hardly be 
overestimated? 

Through education, of course. 

In the course of education, as his 
experience accumulates, man learns 
to classify what he sees, to recognize 
images. 

At this stage scientists come face 
to face with the question which is 
quite unexpected to the layman but 
quite legitimate for a cybernetician: 
can the electronic computer be 
taught to model the process of image 
identification? 

We are tempted to answer this 
question with a citation from a spe- 
cialized encyclopaedia publication: 

“The solvability in principle of the 
image identification problem follows 
from the ability of human _ beings 


IDENTIFICATION OF IMAGES 


and other living organisms to iden- 
tify images. The ability to classify 
complex situations in animate nature 
is acquired through education. It 
is, therefore, advisable to apply the 
principle of education to the crea- 
tion of classifying automata. The 
latter is possible even if the designer 
is initially ignorant of the features 
constituting the basis of classifica- 
tion, provided he disposes of an ade- 
quate number of examples of situa- 
tions being referred to a certain class.” 

Since it was deemed possible in prin- 
ciple to create an identifying machine, 
scientists all over the world began 
looking for ways to implement the 
principle. 

The American cybernetician F. Ro- 
senblueth built one of the first ma- 
chines of this kind and called it the 
“perceptron”. The name stuck. 

The “perceptrons” are reading ma- 
chines. The scientists worked long 
and hard to educate the computers. 
At last, these “literate” automata 
were born. To tell the truth, their 
looks can hardly be distinguished 
from those of their “illiterate” breth- 
ren—the same familiar narrow metal 
cabinet. Only with “eyes”—screens. 
This optical eye of the photo-voltaic 
cell scrutinizes the text and enables 
the machine to identify the images 
of letters. 


Let’s try to find out how the perceptron works. 


Let’s start with the American machine. There is a screen in front —an artifi- 
cial retina made up of four hundred photo-voltaic cells. The screen perceives the 
image. The electric signals which are generated in the retina when an image is 
perceived reach the first row of “neurons”—electronic elements designed to mo- 
del nerve cells. There is another “neuron” above them—the main neuron —which 
receives input signals from the lower row. A special device provides “punish- 
ment” signals. This is the skeleton diagram of Rosenblueth’s perceptron. 

Now several letters are placed before the screen. They, naturally, vary in trans- 


139 


140 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Random connections 


i 


euuan 
Vi 
) 


NII } 
y 
JX 


“ 
= 
Wh 


BUEEERE 
fh} 


! 


i 
i 


‘ 


mnt) 
WY 


(77d 
ry 
}) 
Wh 


f 


Receiving device Neurons with Output units 
amplification 


This is how a perceptron works. After the process of learning the letter “A” has been repeated 
many times to a satisfactory result, the system is “turned over” to the letter “B”, and so on. 


9? 


cription. However, the machine recognizes them, confidently distinguishes “a 
from “b”, “b” from “c”—in fact, any letter from another. 

Did it take long to teach the machine this art? Yes, quite long. At first the 
perceptron made many mistakes and was “punished” for them. When the machi- 
ne made a mistake, the operator pressed the “punishment” button, and the sig- 
nals of the wrong answer reaching the main “neuron” were attenuated. Then the 
figures were again shown to the machine, and its answers were assessed again. 
When all signals assembled to the “conference” presided over by the main “neu- 
ron”, the “culprits” were in minority. 

In this way the machine heeding its own errors learned to identify images. 

Soviet scientists devised a quite different principle of identifying images. 
It is based on the hypothesis of compact sets. Let’s see what it is. 

The teacher wants to teach a youngster to identify an image, i.e. the letter A. 


An identifying machine based on the principle of “compact sets”. A point, corresponding to 
the given letter, falls inside a definite field. The machine remembers the image the points of 
which occupy this field, and identifies the letter. 


4 


a 
| 


=k 


UNDERSTANDING oe 


142 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


To this end he tells him about the features by which this letter may be recogni- 
zed, for instance, by two inclined sticks with a cross-bar in between. 

However, there’s another way open to the teacher. He may lay out before the 
pupil 20 different letters A and tell him that they all are A’s. After that he will 
show him 20 letters B, 20 letters C, etc. And the pupil will begin to recognize 
the letters unfailingly. He has evolved for himself the visual image of each let- 
ter and will not fail to recognize them, no matter how they are written. 

The hypothesis of compact sets is based on the assumption that when man 
sees, the letter A a point —the image of the letter—is instantly fixed in his mind. 
When next time he is shown the same letter, but in a different handwriting, ano- 
ther point is fixed in the vicinity of the first. The different transcriptions of the 
letter—the third, the tenth, the hundredth are all reflected by corresponding 
new points fixed in his mind. But all these points are arranged in a compact lot. 

Lots of points that reflect the different transcriptions of B form another com- 
pact set. The same happens with the images of other letters. 

And each set is separated from the other by clearly defined boundaries —they 
are divided by a sort of fence. 

“Ts there a need for an identifying machine?” you’re going to ask. 

Since, the “electronic calculators” work with the speed of lightning, it will 
not be difficult for them to compare hundreds or even thousands of features of 
various images with the standards that can be introduced into the computer 
“memory”. 

This is all true. But one shouldn’t forget that the capacity of the computer 
“memory” is always limited. Moreover, there are no two images exactly alike 
in the minutest detail. It turns out that, if all features are strictly taken into 
account as should be done for a computer, it is even impossible to find two iden- 
tical type letters. What then remains to be done? To describe each image with 
scrupulous precision? This is a totally impractical task. 

And there is still another obstacle: computer operation according to “stan- 
dards” is impossible without the collaboration of man. It’s man who has to des- 
cribe the standard and provide a whole set of features by which the comparison 
with the standard should be made. The scientists, however, have set the goal 
to teach the computer to identify images by itself. This is no idle task aimed 
only at solving an interesting theoretical problem, but one that will enable iden- 
tifying machines to be used in practice. 


relating to the properties of the stra- 
tum, assesses its electrical, radiative 
and geometrical characteristics. 


The need for such machines in 
practice is very great. Here’s a vivid 
example of the way in which a per- 


ceptron could be useful. Imagine a 
geologist who has to decide on the 
evidence of geological survey whe- 
ther a given stratum is oil-bearing. 

The interpreter-geologist (there is 
such a profession) analyses the data 


There’s literally an ocean of com- 
binations of characteristics that cor- 
respond to an oil-bearing stratum. 
A water-bearing stratum, from which 
the interpreter has to distinguish the 
oil-bearing stratum, has just as many. 


The task becomes immensely more 
difficult because there are no rules 
in geophysics for classifying the stra- 
tum as water- or oil-bearing. And 
this gives rise to mistakes—a very 
considerable proportion of them, from 
5 to 80%. No wonder, then, that the 
possibility of setting up an automa- 
tic classifying system is being close- 
ly studied. Such a system using 
definite characteristics would be able 
to solve the problem of oil content 
in the stratum infinitely more accu- 
rately. 

The nature of information automa- 
ta, too, would experience a great 
change. The machine would be able 
to operate at sight. This would ob- 
viate the translation of the text from 
the “human into the machine lan- 
guage”, and enable direct communica- 
tions with the machine to be estab- 
lished. 

With the aid of the identifying 
machine it will be possible to auto- 
mate the recording of reference data 
for electronic computers the amount 


IDENTIFICATION OF IMAGES 143 


of which is at present estimated as 
being equivalent to several billion 
words; to automate the sorting of 
letters at the post-office; to process 
bank documents; to automate type 
setting, etc. 

Obviously, mechanized translation, 
too, will be greatly facilitated. 

There is another point, as well, to 
the exploitation of identifying ma- 
chines. Having started by imitating 
man’s ability to perceive images of 
the world around him, the percep- 
trons will end by helping to reveal 
the mechanism by which man “builds 
up” images, classifies phenomena, 
events and objects. 

There are different roads along 
which scientists of various speciali- 
ties approach the solution of the pro- 
blems of identifying images, a pro- 
blem that is important both in prin- 
ciple and in practice. 

This is unavoidable and justifiable 
since the task of creating identifying 
machines is extremely difficult. 


 Mushrooming.! 


144 IDENTIFICATION OF SPEECH SOUNDS 


The isolation 

of characteristics 

which unambiguously define 
a sound of speech. 


Let’s Talk Like Human Beings 


Man. Were you glad it rained this 
afternoon? 

Machine. No, I prefer sunny weather. 

Man. In hot weather man needs at 
least one bath a day. 

Machine. Yes, I was outdoors and 
suffered from heat. 

Man. When Xmas comes it will be 
cold. 

Machine. Cold? Yes, it’s usually cold 
in December. 

Man. Today the weather is fine. 

' Will it continue so for a long 
time? 

Machine. Permit me to refrain from 
lying. That would better suit a 
salesman. How can rainy weather 
be fine? 

This dialogue between man and 
machine isn’t an excerpt from a 
science-fiction story. It was conduc- 
ted in plain English several years 
ago at the Toronto University in 
Canada. 


The American computer nicknamed 
“Brick” because of its small size, 
hasn’t as yet learned to speak. How- 
ever, it can identify spoken words 
which have something to do with 
arithmetic. 


The “Brick” is quite fastidious. 
It can’t stand poor pronunciation 
and demands precise and clear dic- 
tion. Probably, for this reason it 
cannot very well understand words 
addressed to it by women. For the 
sake of fairness to avoid being too 
captious to the “Brick” it should be 
remembered that another representa- 
tive of the breed of talking machines, 
too, has a “capricious” character. It 
“lives” at the Institute of Linguis- 
tics of the Georgian Academy of 
Sciences. It was taught to pronounce 
words and phrases in the Georgian 
language. It coped well with this 
task. Then an attempt was made to 
“tune” it over to Russian speech.... 
It spoke with a peculiar southern 
accent. 

To “teach” the computer to speak 
with man scientists spend a lot of 
time and resources “stuffing” the 
computer memory with huge infor- 
mation. 

There is no end to information that 
the computer working to a programme 
deferentially called “Sir” had to di- 
gest before it could answer a question 
quite elementary by our standards— 
as to the number of fingers John has. 

Isn’t that really very interesting— 
a machine capable of listening to 
and understanding human words? Na- 


The sound wave producing the sound “A”. D&gt; 


0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07 


146 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


turally, everybody would like to 
know how it can identify sounds. 
The answer is twofold: it is, at the 
same time, easy and difficult to iden- 
tify sounds. At first let’s find out 
about the easy side—the acoustical, 
physical aspect of the problem. 

Sounds are, by nature, vibrations 
of air, waves of varying length. Every 
sound is characterized by a corres- 
ponding frequency. In consequence, 
sounds may be produced not neces- 
sarily with the aid of vocal chords, 
they may be synthesized. 

For this purpose the machine is 
made to listen to words pronoun- 
ced many times by the same person 
and by different persons. Naturally, 
everybody pronounces the same word 
in his own manner: the timbre of 
the voice, the intonations, the purity 
of pronunciation are all different. 
The machine has to “average” over 
individual pronunciations, exclude 
individual hues, so that when it 
hears the familiar word in future it 
makes no mistake. 


What takes place inside the machi- 
ne? 

The processes are similar to those 
taking place when you talk over the 
telephone or radio: sound oscillations 
are transformed into electric oscilla- 
tions. Special filters filter them ac- 
cording to their frequencies. Then 
their “pattern” is compared with 
that of the standards stored in the 
machine’s memory. This “pattern”— 
the image of the sound—is the ave- 
rage sound that the machine has been 
taught to identify. 

The production of the pattern is a 
rather difficult and monotonous job. 
For instance, in one experiment the 
man under test pronounced the sound 
“a” 100 times. The sound was des- 
cribed 100 times by 14 variants of 
pronunciation, also called images. 
Next the frequencies of appearance 
of the resulting images were compa- 
red. Out of 14 variants one was en- 
countered more often than the others. 
This image was recorded in the ma- 
chine’s memory. 


The machine is taught to identify speech in various ways: by words, syllables. 
phonemes (individual sounds). 


The “Brick”, for example, was taught to identify words by the alteration of 
voiced sounds and sibilants. For this purpose the “Brick” has been supplied with 
a special “separation circuit” where words are divided into groups according to 
their characteristics. The words have to be distinctly spoken into the microphone, 
after which they are amplified. From the “separation circuits” the words 
transformed into pulses pass into the registers and the computing cir- 
cuits. 

Here the results of the separation are analysed. The number of the output 
circuits must correspond to the number of words the machine can iden- 
tify. 

The “Brick” knows 16 words, 10 numbers and six special orders relating to arith- 
metical operations with the numbers. It must be admitted that this work requires 
a lot of money, resources, experiments and time. And still, this is an easy job as 
compared to obstacles cybernetics has to surmount in solving the problem of iden- 
tification of speech. 


5000-20000 Hz] | JJ 1] 
A 

2000- 3000 

1500— 2000 wasee 


11901500 TP TI 

i SK SE Se 
500- 775 ARBRS 

[950-500 &gt;] | 


Time intervals 12345 


2 


EEEEEEEE 


IDENTIFICATION OF SPEECH SOUNDS 


I}lumination 


Frequency filter 


rivvvecrnnns OG 


This is how speech is made “visible”. The microphone converts the sound into electric current 
of corresponding frequencies. This current is passed through the frequency filter. Each filter cor- 
responds to a definite sound pitch range. Small electric lamps are connected to the filters, and 
their brightness changes with the changes in the current intensity. 

The brightness changes are recorded on the light-sensitive film. Below are fourteen different 
pictures obtained when the sound “A” was pronounced 100 times. 


Now let’s tackle the subject of 
the difficult side of the problem. 
The machine must be able not only 
to identify sounds, but to understand 
speech. To understand speech is a 
totally different matter. At present 
the machine cannot understand any 
of the living languages. 

Almost any spoken phrase may be 


10* 


understood differently. Even a phrase 
as simple as that: “The factory pro- 
duces tractors” is too difficult for 
the machine to understand. And ho- 
monyms that sound identical but 
have different meanings? And ima- 
ges, hyperboles, comparisons? How 
can the machine be made to under- 
stand them? 


147 


448 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Separation circuits 


Amplifier 


o 
ned 
5 
5 
_ 
‘a 5 
© 
c 
a c 
3 &amp; 
cc 5 
5 
© 
O 


Registers 
Calculating circuits 


The computer “Brick” identifies words by the alteration of voiced sounds and sibilants, 


The machine is not flexible, it is 
awkward in perceiving words, unable 
to distinguish between the shades of 
emotion and of meaning. It is inca- 
pable of figurative thought: dry lo- 
gic, strict unambiguity, rigorous pre- 
cision—that’s what it needs, and no 


freedom, no flexibility, no allego- 
ries! 

It is immensely difficult to over- 
come this semantic barrier, to make 
the machine understand live human 
speech! Scientists use various me- 
thods, try various “pedagogical devi- 


The dictation typing machine identifies over fifty single-syllable words. Amplified sound is 


passed through the filters where it is separated by frequencies and tra 


itted to the compari- 


son block. Here the sound is re-coded into numbers. Next the digital céde is compared with the 
codes of the syllables to be identified previously recorded in the “memory”. If the recordings 
coincide, this means that the appropriate syllable has been found, and the machine prints it. 


00001— 
BuldA} Jo ;o1U0D dam Ly Se, 
: ees I 0005-0008 
b A | | 000€-0002 
_, Mowe Se 
B1qe11AS J 0002-0051 
i 00S 1—O0LL | 


O47 9.40 


fe) 
4ossaiddns 
asiou pue Jaw} 
*10SS91dWwod puno' 


Arowau 
jeyoeds 


ub 


}INd4119 UOI}eIedes puNoS 
oo 0 0 


0) 


S}PAJO}UI ou 
S493] 1} 


= eter ssed-pueg 


uos liedwoo 
apn}! |duy 


W4.LSAS uv4 
SNOAYSN 3H Yuva IVNHY3LNI 371901uNV 
GNV NIVY9 4 JIGGIN 


ZH 000 91 


UOISS lWSUBI} 
Jejnosnw 
pue arian 


wnip-ie 9 
Saiqiy 8AsJ9U OOO 


150 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


ces” on their metal pupils. Among 
them the method of the Soviet scien- 
tist Andrei Ershov has been recogni- 
zed as the most effective. Here’s 
how the author himself describes the 
method and the underlying principle. 

“Suppose, the machine ‘speaks’ 
some input language that represents a 
sufficiently comprehensive formaliza- 
tion of the Russian language. Man 
ignorant of this language addresses 
the machine in any convenient form. 
The electronic computer has a_ pro- 
gramme which determines whether 
the given text is comprehensible or 
not. If the computer understands the 
text, it starts working on the problem. 
If it fails to understand the text, it 
will ask additional questions laying 
stress on vague points. You'll ans- 
wer, again in the form you will think 
best. These answers will be a kind 
of paraphrase of the points the ma- 
chine failed to understand—the same 
ideas expressed in other words. Ha- 
ving received these paraphrases the 
machine inserts them into the origi- 
nal text and analyses it again. If 
anything still remains obscure, it 
will again put additional questions. 
In this way a dialogue will start 
between man and machine. In the 
course of this dialogue man _ will 
continue to simplify the formulation 
of the task until the machine under- 
stands it. 

“Such a dialogue can be compared 
to that of a teacher and a negligent 
pupil. The pupil has no desire to 
understand what the teacher wants 
from him and continues asking que- 
stions until everything is spoonfed 
to him. With the machine the situa- 
tion. is more difficult. The dialogue 
of man with the electronic computer 
may be characterized as the adapta- 


tion of man to the capabilities of 
the computer, as a sort of ‘getting 
used to one another’. 

“... The relationship between man 
and computer should be such that 
with each new task the computer 
would learn to understand better, so 
that in case of similar tasks the com- 
puter would not repeat similar ques- 
tions. 

“In other words, the computer 
should be made to retain in its electro- 
nic ‘memory’ the records of all its 
conversations with man and to use 
the newly received tasks in its fu- 
ture work. This is tantamount to 
teaching computer human language.” 

But in the meantime.... We speak 
with the computer in the form that’s 
convenient for it rather than for 
ourselves. Flowever, rapid progress of 
computer engineering and extensive 
use of electronic control systems re- 
quire closer ties between man and 
computer. Communications between 
man and computer must be made 
free of delays: man says, the com- 
puter carries out. To achieve this 
end efforts are not being spared to 
teach the computer understand hu- 
man language. 

The advantages of a close contact 
between man and computer are un- 
disputable. 

Just imagine how this would sim- 
plify the job of the specialists in 
computer translation. There would be 
no more need for coders who convert 
the text into the number code. Just 
read phrases distinctly and clearly 
into the microphone—the computer 
will understand everything. 

Or an informaticn machine that 
having heard a question as to where, 
when, by whom, to whom, for what 
invention a patent was issued would 


instantly hand you a precise and 
comprehensive reference. 

Everywhere would there be room 
for talking and understanding machi- 
nes. “Electronic arithmometers” wo- 
uld perform arithmetical operations 
on voice orders. Control systems wo- 
uld receive oral information, process 
it and issue necessary commands. 
Such machines could be employed in 
scientific research centres, in indus- 
try, in transport. 

And how great is the need for such 
machines! Already now it is not 


IDENTIFICATION OF SPEECH SOUNDS 151 


only the computer programmists who 
have to conduct dialogues with the 
computers, but inexperienced people, 
as well: economists, who use them 
in industry, controllers, supervising 
automatic control systems. And in 
the near future these will be supple- 
mented by many other professions. 

Today electronic computers can per- 
ceive dozens of spoken words. They 
are like a small child that builds 
up its vocabulary, learns to pronounce 
words in order to start speaking “like 
everybody”. 


" But I/ve ordered sausages. , 


152, INFORMATION 


Intelligence 

about the ambient world 

and about processes 

taking place in it 

obtained by living organisms, 
control machines 

and other systems in the course 
of their life or their work. 


Not a Substance and Not Energy 


You wake up in the morning and 
find yourself in the world of infor- 
mation: when you see, you receive 
information; when you hear you re- 
ceive information; when you talk, 
you receive information. 

Information is brought to you by 
books, magazines, newspapers, adver- 
tisements, cinema, theatres, radio, 
television... the list is too long to 
be continued. 

Man has been surrounded by infor- 
mation from time immemorial. There 
is every reason to define information 
as a data system of the world around 
us. 
The whole process of cognition con- 
sists in receiving, processing, recor- 
ding and transmitting information 
about this reality. As knowledge de- 
velops these data become more com- 
plete. 

The word “information” stems from 
the Latin. During its long life it 
underwent considerable evolution, in 
the course of which its bounds were 


either widened or extremely nar- 
rowed. 

The original meaning—“notation”, 
“concept”, “outline”—was later trans- 
formed into “intelligence”, “data 
transmission”. In recent years scien- 
tists decided that the general percep- 
tion of the word “information” is 
too “elastic” and reduced it to the 
“measure of certainty of intelli- 
gence”. 

What’s the reason for such evolu- 
tions in the meaning of the word 
“information”? The reason is its ra- 
ther strange character, its elasticity 
that is so loathsome to the scien- 
tist. 

And yet, this concept is so definite 
that it is recognized as one of the 
main subjects studied by cybernetics, 
and that a separate branch of scien- 
ce—the theory of information—dea- 
ling with the problems of collecting, 
transmitting, storing, processing and 
calculating information has been cre- 
ated. 

No matter what are the variations 
in the meaning of the word “informa- 
tion”, the important thing remains 
that it carries intelligence, tells us 
something, makes us acquainted with 
something, i.e. puts an end to the 
lack of knowledge, destroys uncer- 
tainty. 

Practical requirements were respon- 
sible for the appearance of the theory 
of information. By the second half 
of the 20th century the globe was, 
so to speak, humming with informa- 
tion being transmitted along telepho- 
ne and telegraph cables and radio 
channels. 


Lately they were supplemented by 
information processing machines such 


as control and mathematical ma- 
chines. 

Here, too, the peculiar character of 
information made itself felt. When 
designing or operating communication 
systems or channels the engineer can- 
not limit himself with the solution 
of physical and power problems. From 
these points of view the system may 
be quite perfect and economical. But 
if the designers of the transmitting 
system did not pay attention to the 
volume of information being trans- 
mitted by it, it will not be worth a 
dime. 

Don’t wonder. Information can be 
measured quantitatively, can be cal- 
culated. One goes about such calcu- 
lations in quite the usual way: by 
abstracting from the contents of in- 
formation, just as the concrete mea- 
ning is ignored in familiar arithme- 
tical operations (for example, when 
we add two apples and three apples, 
we turn to adding numbers in gene- 
ral 2-++3). 

Scientists are not afraid to concede 
that they have “totally ignored the 
human value of information”. They 
attribute a definite value of informa- 
tion to, say, a sequence of 100 let- 
ters, no matter whether it has any 
sense or not, and without regard to 
the practical application of this sense. 
This quantitative statistical approach 
is the best developed branch of 
the information theory. 

As scientists say: “According to 
our definition a sequence of 100 let- 
ters—be it an extract a hundred let- 
ters long from a newspaper, a Sha- 
kespeare play or Einstein’s theorem— 
contains an equal amount of infor- 
mation.” «Remember arithmetic. 
There, too, it makes no difference 
whether it’s apples, buildings, men, 


INFORMATION 1 


words, ships, stars, etc.—always 100+ 
+20=120.) 

“Our definition of the amount of 
information,” scientists state autho- 
ritatively, “is extraordinarily useful 
and practical. It exactly corresponds 
to the problems of the communica- 
tions engineer who has to transmit 
the full text of a telegram, no matter 
what the value of this information 
is to the recipient.” 

A communications channel has no 
soul. 

And this is not only because it is 
an “unanimated system”, but also 
because it is indifferent to the in- 
formation it transmits: be it joy or 
sorrow, news about birth or about 
death. One thing is important to the 
transmission system—to transmit the 
required amount of information. 

How is the amount of information 
in a concrete message to be calcu- 
lated? 

The evaluation of the amount of 
information is based on the laws of 
the theory of probability. This is 
quite understandable. A message is 
valuable, it carries information only 
if we learn from it of the outcome of 
some event of a casual character, if 
it is to some extent unexpected. 
A message, the contents of which are 
known to us, does not contain any 
information. 

If anyone rings you up and says 
“today is Saturday, tomorrow will 
be Sunday”, such information will 
strike you not by its novelty but by 
its absurdity. Quite another thing is, 
for example, the news of the outcome 
of the final of the chess tournament. 
Who’s. going to win—Ivanov or 
Petrov? Or is the game to be 
drawn? Here the outcome depends on 
chance. 


5 


3 


154 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The greater the number of chance 
outcomes of an event, the more va- 
luable will be the news of its re- 
sult, the more information will it 
carry. 

News of an event with two equally 
probable outcomes contains a unit of 
information called the bit. You have, 
probably, guessed that the choice of 
the unit of information was not ca- 
sual. Well, indeed, it is linked with 
the most widely used binary method 
of coding information. 

Let’s try to grasp the notion, al- 
beit in the most elementary form, 
of this general principle of quantita- 
tive evaluation of information that 
is the cornerstone of the entire the- 
ory of information. 

We know already that the amount 
of information depends on the proba- 
bility of specific outcomes. If an 
event has, in the words of scientists, 
two equally probable outcomes, this 
means that the probability of each 
outcome is equal to 1/2. Such is 
the probability of heads or tails fal- 
ling out, when a coin is thrown. 
If an event has three equally probable 
outcomes, as in our example with the 
chess tournament, the probability of 
each is equal to 1/3. Notice that the 
sum of the probabilities of all out- 
comes is always unity, since one of 
all the possible outcomes will cer- 
tainly materialize. 

An event, as you understand, can 
have outcomes that are not equally 
probable. Thus, in a football match 
between a stronger and a weaker 
team the probability of the victory 
of a stronger team is great—say, 4/5. 
The probability of a draw is much 
less, say, 3/20. The probability of 
defeat is, on the other hand, quite 
small. 


It turns out that the amount of 
information is a measure of the dec- 
rease in the uncertainty of some si- 
tuation. To calculate it special for- 
mulae are used. 


Different amounts of information 
are transmitted through communica- 
tions channels. The amount of in- 
formation passing through a channel 
cannot exceed its capacity. Vice ver- 
sa, the capacity of a channel is de- 
termined by the amount of infor- 
mation it can transmit in a unit of 
time. 


You may remember how one of 
Jules Verne’s personages, the journa- 
list Gedeon Spillet was transmitting 
over the telephone a chapter from 
the Bible to prevent his rivals from 
using the telephone. In this case the 
channel was fully loaded, but the 
amount of information passed was 
zero, since the recipient received in- 
telligence that had already been 
known to him. This means that the 
channel was “idling”, passing a 
definite number of pulses that 
were not loaded with any informa- 
tion. 


At the same time, the greater the 
amount of information carried by 
each of the definite number of pul- 
ses, the more efficient is the use of 
the channel’s capacity. But in order 
to achieve such results information 
should be coded rationally, and an 
economical, concise language should 
be devised for the transmission of 
intelligence. 


For this purpose information is 
thoroughly “filtered”. To cite an 
example, in the telegraph code let- 
ters, letter combinations and even 
entire phrases in frequent use are 
represented by a shorter sequence of 


&gt; 
Oo 
Cc 
© 
me) 
fed 
=] 
xe} 
oO 
pa 
fe 
° 
os 
oO 
iS 
= 
° 
= 
Ss 


Illustrating redundancy. It’s maximum in 
the first case—equal to unity; in the second 
it’s one half; in the third it’s zero. 


units and zeros than those that come 
up less frequently. 

However, it often happens in prac- 
tice that intelligence sent with a 
code established as a result of most 
severe “filtering”, with a code that’s 
quite convenient and economical, can 
be distorted because of interference, 
which, unhappily, is always present 
in communications channels (atmos- 
pherics in radio, black-out of the 
image in television, transmission er- 
rors in telegraph). This interference, 
or noise, as specialists call it, attacks 
information, and this sometimes 
brings surprises. 

A magnetic storm can so distort a 
telegram that instead of “I love you” 
it will read “I kill you”. 

If our message “The game has 
been won by Ivanov”, coded 01, as 
a result of interference will turn 
into 00, “The game has been won 


INFORMATION 155 


by Petrov”, this error will change 
the entire meaning of the message. 
To improve reliability of information 
transmission and processing one has 
to introduce additional symbols that 
serve for protection against interfe- 
rence. These surplus symbols carry no 
actual information in the intelligence, 
they are redundant. 

From the standpoint of the infor- 
mation theory everything that makes 
the language colourful, flexible, rich 
in nuances, ambiguous is a_ redun- 
dancy. 

How full of redundancies Tatya- 
na’s letter to Onegin (in Push- 
kin’s Eugene Onegin) would be from 
this standpoint! How many _ infor- 
mation “surpluses” it contains for 
the short and quite comprehensive 
statement: “I love you!” 

In this connection it is appropriate 
to recollect an anecdote told by the 
famous American scientist Franklin 
about a hatter who convened his 
friends to discuss the design of a 
signboard. 

He planned a signboard with the 
picture of a hat and an inscription: 


JOHN THOMPSON, 
the hatter 
makes and sells hats for cash 


One of the friends remarked that 
the words “for cash” should be drop- 
ped, for such insistence is insulting 
to the buyer. 

Another found the word “sells” 
useless, since it stands to reason that 
a hatter sells hats and does not hand 
them out free. 

The third thought the words “hat- 
ter” and “makes hats” useless tauto- 
logy, and the latter were deleted. 


156 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The fourth suggested that the word 
“hatter” be deleted, too, since the 
hat on the signboard leaves no doubt 
as to the progression of John Thomp- 
son. 

Finally, the fifth stated that it 
was none of the buyer’s business wheth- 
er the hatter’s name was John Thomp- 
son, and advised to drop it. So, in 


the end, only the hat was retained 
on the signboard. 

Of course, if people were to use 
only the economical codes without 
redundancies in intelligence, all “in- 
formational forms”—books, reports, 
papers—would be extremely concise. 
But they would lose in clarity and 
elegance. 


Let’s discuss the block diagram of an information transmission system. 


Every event, every phenomenon can serve as a source of information. In this 
case the word “source” is quite accurate, since this is the origin of the information 


stream. 


Every event, every phenomenon can be expressed by different means, by a 
different “ABC”. To transmit it in the best way possible—accurately and econo- 
mically—it should be appropriately coded. Information cannot exist without so- 
me material carrier, without energy transport. Coded information assumes the 
form of signals. They are the carriers that flow along the communications chan- 
nel. At the receiving end the signals must again assume a comprehensible 


form. 


Information transmission diagram. 


rs) 
c 
=.) 
a 
~ 
3 
a 
c 


Channel : 


INFORMATION 157 


To this end the signals are sent through a decoding device, after which they 
become intelligence to the recipient. 

The communications system has worked, the aim has been attained. 

All the time we are speaking about communications channels using for the most 
part the telegraph as an example. But communications channels is a very wide 
concept that includes numerous quite different systems, this difference being 
sometimes too great to be expected. To make the abundance of meanings of the 
“communications channel” concept clear a few additional examples will suffice. 

Let’s look from this point of view at the telephone. The speaker is the source 
of intelligence in telephone communications. The coding device that turns the 
sounds of words into electrical pulses is the microphone. The information trans- 
mission channel is the telephone cable. The earphone works as the decoding devi- 
ce. Here the electrical signals are again turned into sounds. And finally, the in- 
formation reaches the “receiving device”—man’s ear at the other end of the 
cable. 

Here is a communications channel of a quite different nature—the live nerve. 
Here, too, as in the technical system, the process of transmission is the same for 
all intelligence. True, there’s a difference, since in the technical system the direc- 
tion of information transmission can be changed, while in the nervous system such 
a change is impossible. 

And yet another example—the computer. The main features are again similar. 
The information from one individual part of the computer to another is trans- 
mitted with the aid of signals. The computer is an automatic device for processing 


Channel | 


en ae 
Output signal 


Decoding device Output message 


158 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


information in the same way as a machine tool is a device for processing metal. 
The computer does not create any new information, it only transforms information 


fed into it. 


We know already that the quanti- 
tative approach is one of the most 
developed and widespread trends of 
the information theory. There are 
other approaches, as well. They, as 
distinct from the quantitative appro- 
ach, try to grasp the meaning of 
information, its value, its qua- 
lity. 

Indeed, the case is not rare when 
the amount of information contained 
in two items is identical and the 
Meaning quite different. For example 
two words “ton” and “not” contain 
equal amounts of information, since 
they are made up of the same letters, 
but their meaning is different. 

In everyday life our evaluation of 
the intelligence received is based, as 
a rule, on its meaning. We perceive 
new intelligence not as definite am- 
ounts of information, but as new 
contents. 

Look from this point of view at 
the item “There’s vegetation on 
Earth”. Does it contain information? 
Certainly not, since its contents are 
not new. And now you _ transmit: 
“There’s vegetation on Mars”. This 
item contains information, because it 
reflects the probability of knowled- 
ge, the possibility of the phenomenon, 
not a thing known to everybody. 

Can the meaning of information be 
computed and its contents in a mes- 
sage be calculated? This is what the 
semantic theory of information tries 
to do. 

Here’s another example and anoth- 
er trend in this branch of science. 
This is the pragmatic-business-like 
trend. 


Some passengers are travelling in a 
bus. The driver announces the name 
of the bus-stop. Several passengers 
get out, the rest pay no attention to 
the words of the driver, to the infor- 
mation addressed to them. Why? 
Because, as specialists say, for dif- 
ferent recipients—this time they are 
the passengers of the bus—the infor- 
mation is of different value. Those 
for whom the information was va- 
luable got out of the bus. Consequent- 
ly, the value of information may 
be defined as its ability to in- 


fluence the behaviour of the reci- 
pient. 
In the opinion’ of _ scientists, 


modern trends in the theory of infor- 
mation will in future be supplemen- 
ted by new approaches, and new 
ideas will appear. 

The “vivacious”, growing nature of 
this branch of science, the speed and 
thoroughness with which it enters 
diverse fields of human knowledge is 
proof of these anticipations. It has 
already penetrated physics, chemis- 
try, biology, medicine, philosophy, 
linguistics, pedagogics, economics, lo- 
gic, the technical sciences, aesthetics. 
This is, admittedly, a good start for 
a young science. 

It can therefore be accepted (and 
it is acknowledged by experts) that 
the science of information, having 
been born out of the requirements of 
communications theory and _ cyber- 
netics, in the course of time (and 
pretty soon, at that) transgressed the 
bounds of these sciences. 

And nowadays we are, probably, en- 
titled tospeak of information as a new 


scientific concept that provides the 
research worker with a new theory-of- 
information method. This method will 
open up roads into many branches 
of science dealing with living and 


INFORMATION 


non-living nature, with society and 
knowledge. It will not only throw 
light on new sides of the problems, 
but will enable things heretofore un- 
seen to be seen. 


159 


160 


JACQUARD’S METHOD 


The Jacquard method, 

or the method of perforations, 
is the method 

of recording information 

by punching holes (perforations) 
in information carriers 

such as punch-cards 

or punch-tape. 


The “Talking” Holes 


One out of numerous devices which 
had, apparently, nothing to do with 
calculating machines, proved to be 
of special value for the automation 
of the technique of calculations. 

In Europe’s stormy days, when 
Napoleon conquered one land after 
another and his army was in great 
need of fabric, the French inventor 
Joseph Marie Jacquard, a son of a 
Lyons. weaver, decided to automate 
the loom. He was tenacious and got 
his way—he managed to build a 
loom that even won a medal at the 
Paris exhibition. Soon there were 
over 10 thousand such looms working 
in France. 

Jacquard succeeded in finding a 
method of influencing the intricate 
workings of different mechanisms. The 
inventor devised a set of cardboard 
cards with different sets of holes. 

The holes served to designate the 
working order of the loom. The cards 
were passed under probes. When a 
probe met a hole it went down and 
with the aid of special devices mani- 
pulated the thread. Intricate patterns 
could be woven in this manner. 

The method of control by means 
of perforations in cards or tape pro- 
ved very efficient and soon was wide- 
ly used in machines the intricate 
movements of whose mechanisms re- 
quired coordination. 

The new method was used in musi- 
cal automata, in telegraph appara- 
tus, in type-setting machines. A me- 
chanical piano (pianola) was built, 
in which punch-tape was used to 


control the action of hammers in 
hitting the keys. 

“Tf with the aid of perforations it 
is possible to control machine tools, 
aggregates, musical instruments, why 
not use punch-cards to feed numbers 
into calculating machines and to con- 
trol them?” inquired scientists. 

The Englishman Charles Babbage, 
the dean of the mathematical faculty at 
the University of Cambridge—the 
faculty once headed by Newton—was 
one of those who pioneered in the 
construction of calculating machines 
employing punch-cards. 

Once in 1812 Babbage was looking 
through the tables of logarithms. He 
knew they were full of mistakes, and 
reflected upon the way of avoiding 
them in the new edition. 

He remembered that French scien- 
tists had used a new method to com- 
pile other tables. They divided a 
complex problem into several simple 
operations, which amounted to ad- 
dition and subtraction. These opera- 
tions were performed by people who 
knew nothing of mathematics, except 
simple arithmetical operations. 

Babbage decided to make calculat- 
ing machines perform these simple 
operations. 

In 1822 he built a small working 
model. The idea was enthusiastically 
received by the British Royal Society. 
Within a year grants were received, 
a workshop built, and _ blue-prints 
ordered. But progress was slow. Diffi- 
culties were aggravated by the in- 
ventor striving to introduce endless 
improvements into the design. 

Some ten years passed, and Babba- 
ge was left alone with his creation. 
Work was interrupted and in 1842 
stopped altogether. 

But Babbage refused to surrender. 


11—616 


JACQUARD’S METHOD 


He drew up another project, a bolder 
one than the previous. This was the 
“analytical machine” which became 
the prototype of modern high-speed 
computers. The project envisaged it 
as consisting of three parts: the first, 
called “depot” by Babbage, with the 
aid of counters recorded and stored 
numbers; the second—the “factory” — 
was to operate with numbers taken 
out of the “depot”, and the third 
which was not named by the inventor 
but which could be called the “office” 
controlled the sequence of operations, 
chose the numbers and directed the 
results of calculations to appropriate 
places. 

Babbage estimated his machine to 
be capable of 60 additions per minute, 
or of one multiplication of two fifty- 
digit numbers, or of a division of a 
hundred-digit number by a fifty-di- 
git one. He planned the capacity of 
the “depot” at one thousand fifty- 
digit numbers. 

The calculating process could be 
controlled with the aid of punch- 
cards. Probes, passing through holes 
in the cards, set in motion mecha- 
nisms that transported numbers from 
the “depot” to the “factory” and 
back. 

Some parts of the machine were 
made, presumably, in Babbage’s life- 
time. After his death the “factory” 
was partly built by his son. At pre- 
sent the machine is at the London 
Science Museum. 

Babbage had a clear notion where 
his machine should be employed. He 
wanted to calculate mathematical and 
navigational tables, check logarithm 
tables, check astronomical data, cal- 
culate the mean life of man in Eng- 
land and solve many other complex 
problems. 


161 


162 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Progressive-minded people of the 
time hailed Babbage’s invention. The 
famous writer Edgar Poe wrote: 
“What should we think of Babbage’s 
calculating machine? What should 
we think of a machine, made from 
wood and metal, which can not only 
calculate astronomical and naviga- 
tional tables of any required length, 
but can even make the accuracy of 
its operations mathematically cer- 
tain due to its ability to correct pos- 
sible mistakes? What should we think 
of a machine, which in addition to 
all this, can print its own intricate 
results, attained without the slight- 
est interference of man’s intel- 
lect?” 

Babbage’s invention proved to be 
ahead of its time. His idea was not 
realized. However, the services ren- 
dered by the scientist to the cause 
of computer engineering are very 
great. He developed the principles 
of organization and construction of 
powerful automatic calculators and 
was the first to use the punch-card 
data put in the calculator. 

In the year 1890 a population cen- 


sus took place in England. To increase 
the speed and to reduce the costs of 
processing the results engineer Hol- 
lerith built a special adding ma- 
chine and called it the tabulator. 

This inventor, too, made use of 
the punch-card number input system, 
but on a new basis. He profited by 
the advances in electrical engineering 
and constructed his machine on the 
electromechanical principle. It reta- 
ined mechanical counters, but was 
controlled by electrical pulses. 

In Hollerith’s tabulator the punch- 
card was sensed by brushes made of 
thin wires. When brushes came ac- 
ross holes in the punch-card, circuits 
were closed, and electric pulses ap- 
peared. These pulses were used to 
introduce the numbers and to con- 
trol the machine. 

The first tabulator was very primi- 
tive, but, nevertheless, the problem 
of automatic count with the aid of 
punch-cards and of electric current 
was solved not only in principle, but 
in practice, as well. A new leaf was 
turned in the history of computer 
engineering. 


A set of modern punch-card computers is shown on pages 166-167. It consists 


of two groups of machines: for the preparation and preliminary processing of the 
punch-cards and for calculating operations. The most, so to speak, important ma- 
chine of the set is the tabulator. Not only can it count independently—add, mul- 
tiply, divide numbers, automatically combine these operations—but it can even 
perform some logical] operations. The machine does this all with the aid of punch- 
cards. 

In the printing shop a number grid consisting of 80 columns of numbers is prin- 
ted on the card. The numbers from 0 to 9 are arranged in each column from top 
to bottom. These are the positions in which holes may be punched. Besides, the 
card between the ninth and the eighth rows bears the numeration of the lines of 
columns. In this form the cardboard rectangle is “mute”. To make it talk it is 
necessary to punch holes in the positions of the columns. They are punched, or 
perforated, with the aid of a special machine, the perforator. After that the cards 


JACQUARD’S METHOD 163 


95 


a7 


66 66 70-72 74 Te 18 BB 


gogo gnbsé 
ree! 


t 
24 5S URKHROUMBEULANUMNHWBANRHKHHHTMHHPNH RHETT 
DE OMOMCCOBO NOT ONO GOD NGOOCORDONON OND ODODE COG DODDG00 00000000000 90000000000000009 


BREE! 111111) teat | | he) DRRROR RRO ROR ERRRR REDO RO REDE RAROEADER MOR REEREROERERE REAL 
222222 22222222 
SPEESBESS] PESESESESESEEEESESESESSSEESESESEEESEESEISSLESSSESOS SEE EPESESESESTSESES! 
Pore: ort Col PecereeOereceeec Ceelecierrl (COerecerrcrecccrorrecriceecrecccererrrcey 
SSPSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSHSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS 
COGCCC EEE EGER OEE EOE E EEOC EEC EEEO EOE C HEED EEOC OE EAGS EG EE EEE GE EEE 6566566666 66866 
ADDR) LEPPRRRADRARERIRRARERODISROORORIR RADAR RRREPRRREAEAALEEATRORARERROEEER | {El | 
GECDARCRTROTAGORTTRHeURRR ONE NORECEReeRTNASeLagetageateucesanaen ues sD eaeetCEEs 
999999999999199IFITIT99IIGFIIIIITIII 999999999999999999999959999959999 9999999999 


Various types of punch-cards. 


go to another machine, the controller, that checks whether the cards were punched 
correctly. 

Suppose the holes on the punch-card in our example show the data of the work- 
ing order of a lathe operator. In a month in a large plant hundreds of thousands 
of such cards will be accumulated. When the time comes to calculate workers’ 
pay, to collect data about the execution of the plan or about production costs, 
the electrical sorting machine sets to work. It groups cards into separate blocks 
by various features with the speed of tens of thousands of cards per hour. Then 
the cards are sent to the tabulator. 

Here, to begin with, the cards are read. This is done by a special block of 80 
brushes—one for each column of the card. The brushes are connected by means 


tg 


2Antonov Grocery 
CC Name, surname 
i2Kirov St. 


C. Town, region 


| sa) eegeieees —— 
CC Manner of payment 


ae 1740C. 


rT Perervererrernrer ey) Tea 99 1853 40 139 5560 C 
cc Desription Code j ees n{ 
Sugar 118 0 298 14900 C.F 
cc Description jCode Jeduct|PJC.| Sum 
Flour 125 ae 40 a 10000 C. foods 
poapossasgogegy cc Description codes ——— ey, Pea Sum 
savetene ah 
108, 


103 jue 30, 396 sete rson] 7 mele lecteanie ad Z 
Description “Teote Perciche aunty 
ee Co annccnreia ee” —aaniES 961 10 290 2909 C.g 
cc [CC Description [Code Code ey ial 


re mut Mt Gaaabita, re 


a eteas Pesscrtep. Sumi 20 265° 235 C ral 
Description eee g Pesscrtep. Sumi C./P.|S 

Rice a Iol, 34, 40 255 10200 
Description |Code BeductjC.) Pe!Sum 


Pepper 


124 
too 
EC Description Code D&amp;d 7 
seosae teetceae eesereetspe 


TaT TRERRRTURETEREREAARED Phd QRRRETRRTRTRRIERE ORTED rih@etherssaharteseey 
Fe) PESRESESEPESESLSPSESSSSSS 1) TE SEeeCeeeeeEeeeere (eeeee! Ee) eee Ee) Le eee eee eee 
QQ ang g29079920929903299 5999 99799299929 MII? BaP aaBp aap aaasya2990220270998 2 


. 

4aaae ta MYPRTTTTeTey Trey CCU O hae e eed e dae daeaeedaadad = 
i 
SSSSSHSSSS “Dp 


rrerrrererrrrnrre) 
PSSESSSSHSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSHSSSSISSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSHSSSS SSIS BSS SS OS SSSES 


Transport charges 


Cr Ere 


COCCORCEESUCECEECE 


DIDTETVEIATTITDD 
Dib ciustirsshreciust 


pe SaaeQeseesanaseggaacas 


hicvtee ewe ee eee 


Definition 


aoee 
vets 


Cvneetersasgagage 


fT EPESESRES SOSEEEESSSOSL) SEERSEOSESCSOSSLEL ES Eee Pee Pee eet eee resell eter 
2299993H999B29999979099999999929992929399H97I777IIIIIFIIIT. 99999999999 yf 


rifverey TYTTETERTIVITIVTT ITT PUVVTUVETETETTT ary Tr TETTRTTTTTTTerirrrr errr err ry ie 
SSSSSSPOSSSSSSSSSSSESHSSSBSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSISMSISSSSSISSSSHSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS555 
Tn) SOCRGEGCERESKEGSGEEROCERS 
t GechafeeS: -  “ &lt;;se Receipes pac Ra 
PUVTTVDTAVTTTTA TAT 


Cera 


PEEERERELERE BSED) ih] 


In this way the computer compiles a summary inventory-bill card for goods sent to the custo- 
mer from aset of cards. The summary includes the goods, their price, deduction, transport char- 


ges, etc. 


Inventory calculation result 


Permanent 


Calculated 


ey 

sssssbsssssbsaog 

SOcececcRccwcc 
a eee eke 
rn; 


ses 
asiks 


banseshtvabesseppossnopenens 


see 


tray om 


sloseapssosebsangsnsasy 


[reese 


My 


Summary card 
Oe | aed decency 
js SSS sis sis s sss ot fs 
Gogg 


vr 


Be ee aa) 


jercesspapesiens 


sBassbs aah es aoap 


plzz 


DaPPTIIIIBIIIIIII | 


Tees ey 0 et Pee | Pee eee ee 


SSPMHPGHHPAssssgasssgesgssggg sly 
=. 


166 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


of wires to the counters and the printing mechanisms. The punch-card moves 
with the tens first. The brushes start by sensing every ninth position, then the 
eighth, etc. 

Here’s a card with a hole in the eighth position of the thirteenth column. The 
brush will close the electric circuit, the electromagnet of the number disc will be 
energized, and the disc will start to turn. The card will move one position for- 
ward to the seventh position. The disc will turn the angle of the number and 
will show 1. The card will move yet to another position—the sixth—and the disc 
will show 2. The turn of the disc is completed as the brush reaches the zero posi- 
tion. The disc has turned through each of the eight positions and now shows 8. 
The eight from the punch-card has been thereby transported to counter file that 
corresponds to the thirteenth column. Addition is done in the same way. 

And who controls a big complex computer? 

Just these punch-cards and brushes. To enable the electric pulse to travel in- 
side the machine all electric circuits connected with the brushes, counters, print- 
ing mechanisms are made to terminate on the commutating panel which with the 
aid of switches distributes the electric pulses over the entire machine. 


The control system of the modern dy in 1950 Soviet engineers produced 
tabulator is extraordinarily flexible one of the best punch-card calcula- 
and multilateral. A good tabulator tors, the “T-5” tabulator. It contains 
is able to process up to 60 thousand eight 11-file counters. This means 
cards per hour, or even more. Alrea- that eight columns of multiposition 


A calculating and perforating set. The perforator punches holes in the card. The controller 
checks and sorts them. The tabulator—the main machine of the set—counts the numbers: 7— 
magazine; 2—contact brushes; 3—contact shaft; 4—card-guiding rollers; 5—contact; 6—coun- 


ae eae 


— 


The working 
of the sorting device 


numbers can be summed up simulta- 
neously—70 thousand additions per 
hour! 

A hundred accountants will be able 
to perform during this time only 25 
thousand arithmetical operations. 

According to their principle of ope- 
ration the punch-card calculating ma- 
chines are subdivided into mechani- 
cal, electromechanical and_ electro- 
nic types. 

You’ve just read about the elec- 
tric machines. In mechanical machi- 
nes the holes are sensed— “read” —by 
special tentacles—the pins. Such ma- 
chines perform only 100 operations 
per minute. 

The change over from mechanical 
and electromechanical devices to elec- 
tronic devices resulted in the speed 
of punch-card machines being increa- 


JACQUARD’S METHOD 


sed. But the punch-card and the prin- 
ciple of organization of the calculat- 
ing process in the combination of 
punch-card calculating machines set 
a limit to the productivity. A point 
to note is that the calculating speed 
of the tabulator is some 15 times 
higher than the speed of key-board 
summing machines, while the produc- 
tivity of the whole combination is 
only 3 to 4 times higher. This is the 
result of the, as yet, great part 
played by manual labour: the cards 
are controlled and punched by operator 
and transported from machine to ma- 
chine by man. And even if the lot of 
punch-cards carried at a time is much 
greater in this case than in the case 
of key-board machines, the slow speed 
of card processing in machine’s 
mechanisms greatly influences the 


ter electromagnet; 7— typing electromagnet; 8—clutch; 9—counter driving axle; 10—counter 
wheel; 7J—anchor lock; 72—clutch lever; 73—lever return planck; 74—digit rod; 75—three- 


arm lever. 


LTT) 
i 


Z 


167 


168 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


overall productivity of  calcula- 
tion. : 

The supply of punch-cards is that 
number “depot” that Babbage tried 
to build with the aid of counters work- 
ing at the same rate as the “factory”. 
He understood that man could be 


liberated from the necessity to take 


part in the calculating process only 
by their concerted operation. 

Only after a century of progress in 
technology were the engineers able, 
using the modern counting and pun- 
ching set as the basis, to start work 
on advanced calculators and later on 
electronic computers. 


Again a traffic offence! 


K 


KEY TO THE CIPHER 


A secret system 

which enables the meaning 
transmitted with the aid 
of a cipher to be disclosed. 


“A Secret Shrouded in Darkness” 


Ciphering is frequently used in mi- 
litary communications, in diploma- 
tic service—generally, when it is 
desired to maintain the secrecy of 
correspondence or of an oral message. 

Members of revolutionary under- 
ground groups, who had to conduct 
their correspondence in such a man- 
ner as would make it incomprehen- 
sible for tsarist gendarmes, were 
among those who resorted to ciphers. 

There are numerous ciphers in exis- 
tence. Some are purely professional: 
the simple substitution cipher, the 
fractional, so-called, diagram, three- 
gram, n-gram ciphers, Vigenére ciphers 
together with their variants, the Play- 
fair cipher, codes of different types. 

And the cipher, the like of which 
has never been seen before, from the 
story “Little Dancing Men” that 
Sherlock Holmes managed to read? 

He was intrigued by the strange 
notes with the dancing men. 

The famous detective was quick to 
see that this was a cipher, and began 
looking for the key. Soon the key was 
found, and Sherlock Holmes after 
having guessed the meaning of each 
figure was able to read the notes. 
He proceeded by writing a letter to 
the criminal with the same cipher, 
and the criminal had to face the law. 

There is a ciphered message on p. 
171 which you are required to deci- 
pher. Look what’s written there. You 
may sit for years looking at the mes- 
sage, try billions of combinations, 
but if you don’t know the key, you'll 
never be able to read it. 

To become an experienced deci- 


169 


170 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


ARK OKAY TO 


“The little dancing men”—a cipher deciphered by Sherlock Holmes. 


pherer in this case you'll have to arm 
yourself with paper and scissors. 

Draw 64 chess squares on a piece 
of paper. Cut out holes precisely to 
the drawing, and you’ll get a grid. 

Lay the grid over the disordered 
set of letters with number 1 directed 
upwards. 

Look, a text has appeared in the 
holes: electronic comput.... Now turn 
the grid clockwise by a quarter of a 
revolution. You’ll get another part 
of the phrase—ers are able to solv.... 

Another such turn yields e compli- 
cated math.... And the last: ematical 
problems. In the case of this cipher 
the grid serves as the key that enab- 
les the message to be read. Every 
secret inscription, every cipher nor- 
mally has only one correct solution, 
a unique key, the secret of which is 
to be guarded. Even when a message 
not destined to be seen or heard by 
strangers falls into the hands of the 
enemy, it remains silent until the 
key to it is found. 


It’s ageneral rule that a solution for 
any ciphering system may, in prin- 
ciple, be found by the simple trying 
out of all the keys possible in each 
case. But this trying out is to be 
continued until the unique key is 
found that will make the cipher talk. 

The American scientist Claude Shan- 
non carried out very informative 
calculations to the effect. He set him- 
self the task to find the key to a ci- 
pher consisting of only 26 possible 
key combinations. Twenty-six is a 
very small number. One has to use 
these 26 key variants, only one of 
which is the correct variant, substitu- 
ting in turn all the 26 letters of the 
English ABC. The scientist obtained a 
formidable number—10™! That’s the 
number of years that will have to 
be spent in search of the key to the 
cipher. 

And this in conditions extremely 
favourable for the imaginary oppo- 
nent: Shannon assumed that the op- 
ponent invented an electronic device 


KEY TO THE CIPHER 171 


With the aid of this grid you'll be able to read what’s written here. 


for trying out: the keys at a Here’s a vivid proof of the immense 
speed of one key per  microse- discrepancy existing between the “so- 
cond. The opponent will find the lution of the deciphering problem in 
right key after trying out, approxi- principle by the method of trying out 
mately, one half of the possible com- the keys” and its practical realiza- 
binations! tion. 


Nowadays people are trying to approach ciphering, or cryptography, fully 


armed with mathematica] analysis. The aforesaid American cybernetician Claude 
Shannon even ventured to develop a diagram of a general secret system to this 
end. Indeed, all such systems are quite identical in principle irrespective of the 
cipher and the ciphering system used. 


172 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Enemy cipherer [ 


Source of 
messages 


Code 8 source 


E=(m,k) 


A schematic diagram of a generalized secret system and its formula. 


There are always two terminals: the transmitting and the receiving. 

The transmitting terminal is always connected to two sources of information: 
one is the source of intelligence that has to be transmitted, the other is the source 
of keys that determines the key for ciphering by choosing one definite key out of 
all the keys of the system. 

The completed cryptogram is transmitted along the communications channel. 
The communications channels may be of different kinds: messenger, post, telegraph, 
radio. At the receiving end the other cipherer with the aid of the key reproduces 
the intelligence from the cryptogram, i.e. deciphers it. 

It is natural to presume that the enemy will, certainly, try to intercept the 
message. Therefore, another factor will act on the cryptogram during its transmis- 
sion along the communications channel—the cipherer of the enemy. 

Such is the general lay-out of a secret system proposed by Shannon. 


If you take a look at this lay- The monument of the written lan- 
out, you will not fail to conclude guage, itself, may be regarded as a 
that its bounds are much wider than “cryptogram”, consisting of the source 
the secret system in its “pure” form. of intelligence (in this case it’s 

Let’s take, for example, a message what the author of the text wanted 


in some unknown “dead” language. to transmit) and the source of keys. 


(in our example it’s the ABC used 
by the author). The scientist who 
tries to find his way about in the sec- 
rets of the unknown language and 
read the text of interest to him, will 
assume the role of the cipherer ope- 
rating at the receiving terminal. True, 
in our case the intercepting cipherer 
is totally out-of the question. 

What an enormous number of keys 
the scientists deciphering forgotten 
written languages have to try out! 
What toil, what patience and, fre- 
quently, despair accompany their gi- 
gantic work! 

It’s a known fact that the famous 
Rawlinson who succeeded in reading 
the clay tables of the Babylonians 
wrote in 1850: “I must openly admit 
that when I, after having identified 
every Babylonian sign and every Ba- 
bylonian word, for which I could 
find support in the tri-lingual inscrip- 
tions, tried to apply the information 
to interpret Assyrian inscriptions, I 
was frequently tempted to give up 


KEY TO THE CIPHER 173 


my investigations once and for all, 
since I lost all hope of ever achieving 
any satisfactory results.” It took 
years to understand the Babylonian 
inscription of Xerxes: “Xerxes, the 
great king, the king of kings, the 
son of Darius, the king, Achaemenid”. 
Couldn't electronic computers be 
used to decipher ancient manuscripts? 
The statistical method is of great 
help in the case. The essence of the 
method entails the precise knowladge 
of the signs contained in manuscripts 
that have yet to be read and of the 
regularity of the appearance of these 
signs. For instance; the ancient Egyp- 
tian writing contains up to 800 differ- 
ent characters, the Hett—some 500. 
The syllable systems of languages 
contain from 50 to 80 sounds. The 
European languages usually contain 
about 30 sounds, the Polynesian 
only 10-12; some Caucasian langua- 
ges, on the other hand, 70-80. 
Accordingly, the experiments aimed 
at deciphering the written language 


"Xerxes, the great king, the king of kings, the son of Darius, 
the king, Achaemenid" 


The Babylonian inscription of Xerxes. 


174 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


of the Maya carried out in Novosi- 
birsk at once lead to the conclusion 
that Maya signs can be neither of the 
purely character type, nor of the 
purely ABC type. The language con- 
tains 340 signs. No ABC will hold as 
many. On the other hand, 340 signs 
are insufficient for character writing. 
In all, seven methods were used 
to decipher Maya texts. And each 
proved useful: it either supported 
the results or controvened them. 
The computer was at work for two 
days. It performed a billion opera- 
tions. Deciphered 40 per cent of the 
text. To decipher all known Maya 
texts 200 computer hours will be nee- 
ded additionally. The computer will 
have to perform billions of operations. 
Well, it can be agreed that the 
first step in the computorized deci- 
phering of forgotten languages has 
been made. It is to be hoped that 
in due time the scientists decipherers 
aided by a mathematical cryptogra- 
phic system and electronic computers 
will be able to vitalize numerous 
ancient inscriptions that up to now 
have remained silent, and those “dead”, 
“forgotten” written languages will 
tell stories of peoples of by-gone centu- 
ries, of their life, of their culture. 
And those are not idle hopes. There 
is a sound basis for them: the 
Soviet specialist M. Probst has worked 


out a computer algorithm for deciphe- 
ring forgotten written languages. 

This algorithm has already been 
tried: it was used to read control 
texts, texts which had been read 
before and had been offered to the 
computer as “examination papers”. 

Well, the computer, adhering to the 
“rules for action”, dealt effectively 
even with short texts that are very 
difficult to decipher. 

This computer algorithm was also 
used for independent research. The 
electronic computer was instructed to 
clarify obscure texts relating to the 
11-12th centuries found on the terri- 
tory of modern Mongolia—the Ki- 
dan inscriptions. 

In the course of previous studies 
the Kidan written language was 
classified as relating to the Turk 
or Tungus-Mongolian groups of lan- 
guages. The computer “swallowed” 
large texts, studied the regularities 
of the language and confirmed that 
the language of the once mighty state 
of the Kidans was akin to Mongolian. 

Well, let’s bid the computer-deci- 
pherer a happy journey, let’s wish it 
new successes. The more so because 
specialists consider deciphering his- 
toric written systems to be a particu- 
lar case of the general problem which 
they have termed “the problem of 
formal research of the language”. 


The initiator of novel trends. 


" They'll understand me in the 20th century." 


L 


LANGUAGE, COMPUTER 


Special methods 

of information 

recording for its transmission 
to the electronic computer 


Chocolate and “Algol” 


Everyone knows that language is 
the most important means of human 
communication; that language is the 
most lively, most abundant, most 
stable connection establishing entity 
between the generations past, present 
and future; that, finally, the language 
is an exclusive capacity of man. And 
of man alone! 

And suddenly—computer language. 

And, yet, it exists. Not only exists, 
but is being developed, improved in 
the process of overcoming multifari- 
ous difficulties and obstacles. 

Since its existence is an established 
fact, let’s meet it; let’s learn what 
it is, what it is for. 

It is no more a secret for us that 
electronic computers, no matter for 
the solution of what problems they 
are employed, serve only one purpo- 
se—that of processing incoming infor- 
mation. The computer can perform 
such processing, however, only in 
case the problem—what the computer 
should do—and the method of solu- 
tion—how it should do it—have been 
precisely formulated. 

A word description is of no use to 
the “electronic arithmometer”—it’s 
very bulky, not sufficiently precise 
and rigorous. This is because our spo- 
ken language has the qualities of 
great flexibility, ambiguity of words, 
figurativeness, even some subjectivity. 

Just these characteristics make it 
unsuitable for the computer. It requi- 
res uniqueness, concreteness, and pre- 
cision. That is the reason why prob- 
lems are translated from the human 
into the computer language; the list 


175 


{76 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


of instructions that the computer 
must carry out to solve the problem 
is recorded in a special (binary—O 
and 1) code. This list of instructions 
together with their sequence is called 
the programme. It distributes all the 
operations of the computer, describes 
all calculating processes. 

This is how a recording made 
in the computer language looks: 
0001 .0000001010. 

One thing is clear to the layman— 
it’s some sort of a code. But what is 
it? And that’s the way the computer 
reads it: “Add the number from the 
cell number ten of the working ‘me- 
mory’ to the number in the sum- 
mator.” 


Here we’re up against a definite — 


supremacy of 0 and 1 over the natural 
language: just fourteen signs, and you 
have a sentence of fourteen words. 
High capacity out of all qualities has 
certainly been realized in the compu- 
ter language. 

Owing to this it is well adapted 
for information exchange between man 
and computer and between computers. 
Computer language also helps in case 
of information exchange between 
people effected by means of computers. 
It enables computers to conduct “dia- 
logues” with other systems and with 
systems within the computer itself. 
Its range of action is, as you can see, 
quite wide. 

However, besides advantages the 
computer language has some defects. 
And the main, quite essential one is 


that every class of computers has its 
own “dialect”, which only it can 
understand. Years of existence of 
high-speed electronic “counters” 
brought into being almost 5000 artifi- 
cial languages! “Cobol”, “Fortran”, 
“Jovial”, “Alpha”, “APS”, “Alco- 
pol”, “Mathematic”—they are too 
numerous to be enumerated. 

There’s no end to difficulties that 
spring from such language discrepan- 
cy. To transmit problems formulated 
for one computer to another of diffe- 
rent design the programmists have to 
make up a new programme. What 
costs in labour and time! Imagine a 
calculating centre employing limited 
equipment. The day the centre is 
expanded and the equipment is 
changed the computer language exist- 
ing at the centre will “break down”. 

For this reason programmes com- 
piled at the level of instructions—at 
the level of a specific computer— 
could no longer satisfy the scientists 
in conditions of contemporary state 
of science and industry, when gigan- 
tic amounts, literally avalanches, of 
calculations are required. They de- 
cided to go over from “local compu- 
ter dialects” to the language of auto- 
matic programming—a veritable com- 
puter language, which every com- 
puter should be able to under- 
stand. 

This task is much more difficult, 
much more complicated than the task 
of simply enumerating instructions in 
a programme. 


What is the automatic programming language for? The purpose is always iden- 


tical: to help the programmist tell the computer what to do. 

Specialists compare such an artificial language with that part of the spoken 
language which is used in instructions telling people “what to do”. For instance, 
it’s very much like the language of an ordinary cooking book. Analogy with some 


DESCRIPTION| PROCEDURES 


INGREDIENTS OF THE ORDER OF PREPARATION 
CANDY 


Mix the first five ingredients 
in a simmering pot stirring 
continuously until the sugar 
dissolves 


— ; Stirring occasionally simmer 


until a drop turns into a soft 
ball in cold water 


1 cupful milk 


Take the pot off the fire and 
add butter 


% a tea spoonful salt 


Leave to.cool (no stirring) 
until cold enough to hold 


Add vanilla. Beat with spoon 
until the mixture loses jts 
shine and small amounts of tit 
when poured from the spoon 
keep their shape 


2 table spoonfuls 
corn syrup 


Place into a buttered. form 


2 table spoonfuls oi! 


Coo}. Cut into pieces 


% a tea spoonful vanilla 


178 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


recipe from the cooking book is usually resorted to in order to describe the classes 
of grammatical forms characteristic of an artificial language. 

Let’s take the recipe for making chocolate candy (see illustration on p. 177). 

It certainly hasn’t escaped you that the recipe is subdivided into two parts. 
The first consists of a description of stuffs needed to make the candy. The second 
describes procedures that are to be carried out in sequence in order to solve the 
problem: make the candy. 

Similarly, the languages of automatic programming contain grammatical forms 
of two types. They are called descriptions and procedures. Descriptions, for their 
part, are subdivided into two types: the description of data—a list of component 
parts, and the description of programmes—subprogrammes. The procedures that 
are to be carried out in accordance with the recipe are similar to an ordinary com- 
puter language programme. Next follow the procedural operators—they corres- 
pond to sentences and describe operations which are to be performed with the com- 
ponent parts. 

In general, operators and data descriptions in the artificial computer language 
consist of expressions which may be directly built up from numbers, words, ab- 
breviated designations of measures, auxiliary sentences and word groups. Expres- 
sions corresponding to words consist of combinations of symbols. 

This interconnection of the structures of the “what to do” type is characteristic 
both of the language of a cooking book and of the automated language. The diffe- 
rence lies exclusively in actions of procedural operators, which depend on the 
field of application of the language. 

The operators “mix”, “cool”, “beat”, “cut into parts”, “stir”, for example, 
are relevant to the process of food preparation. Calculating processes, on the other 
hand, entail different operators: “extract a square root”, “take the 24th degree”, 
“attribute the value”, “repeat the following calculations until....” 


You have thus become acquainted ve a single computer language—is 


with the general traits and peculiari- 
ties of the automated computer lan- 
guage. Now learn about the history 
and the purpose. of its creation. 
The automated computer language 
is needed to “kill two birds with one 
stone”: first, to facilitate the work 
of the programme compiler—the pro- 
grammist—who up to this day com- 
piled “instructions for actions” for 
the computer by hand. The essence 
of automated programming is, on the 
other hand, to make the computer 
compile programmes for itself, to cut 
manual labour to the minimum. The 
second (very important) aim—to evol- 


already known to you. 

At last this single language, which, 
it is presumed, all the world’s com- 
puters are going to “speak”, came 
into being. This didn’t happen over- 
night. Much time was spent on pre- 
paratory work. In 1958 an interna- 
tional conference was convened in 
Zurich. And only by the year 1960 
did the international organizations 
connected with the technique of cal- 
culations create a working group, 
which corrected the errors discovered, 


‘eliminated obvious ambiguities, in- 


troduced greater clarity—in short, 
improved the language known nowa- 


days under the name of “Algol-60”, 
which means “algorithmic language”. 

The description of this computer 
language is preceded by an epigraph: 
“What can be said must be said clear- 
ly, and what cannot be said must not 
be said at all.” 

This is why the international cy- 
bernetic language consists only of 
500 words. These are special instruc- 
tions needed to control the computer. 
The diversity of these instructions is 


limited by the words “begin” and 
“end”. 
This computer language, like all 


languages, has its own letters, num- 
bers, syntax and semantics. But many 
features are peculiar only to compu- 
ters. It’s very much akin to usual 
mathematical formulations well adap- 
ted for translation into the computer 
language by the computer itself. But, 
unhappily, it is so complicated that 
besides the computer it can be under- 
stood only by the professional pro- 
grammist who at present stands as 
“priest-medium” between man and 
computer. 

The language of the “Algol-60” 
type is usually defined as a universal 
language because it is adapted to 
quite different computers. But.... Here 
again obstacles arise in the way of 
the scientists. Even the universal 
language turns out to be not truly 
universal. It is limited by its orien- 
tation, its “field of action”. 

“Algol” is a language designed for 
scientific and technological computa- 
tions, for solution of mathematical 
problems. This language pays little 
attention to the form and the context 
of data. 

But there are problems where form 
and context of the data are particu- 
larly important. This is true of the 


ig 


LANGUAGE, COMPUTER 


~———. 


ALGOL 
TOBOL\. 


ART[TRIE| APS 
Bpp0 &gt; 


[coat 


|| MAD | FORTRANSIT) IP: 


COMMERCIAL 
TRANSLATOR 
ess 


APS Ill 


The “Tower of Babylon” of computer lan- 
guages. 


information processing problems: how 
to process large amounts of data, 
how to systematize them in repeating 
operations, etc. 

“Cobol” is increasingly being used 
as such a universal language. It is 
designed to solve economic problems. 
“Cobol” is built on the basis of the 
usual Latin ABC. Moreover, because 
of its sphere of application, it descri- 
bes practically everything with words, 
which have a concrete meaning in the 


179 


{80 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


ordinary natural language. Due to 
this, a “Cobol” text looks very much 
like a natural language text. 

Now you can see what a long and 
tedious journey the computer langua- 
ges have made from “dialects” to 
several general universal languages. 
There’s no doubt that this is rather 
the beginning than the end of the 


Radiogoods } ¢ 


# 911100110000101000011110111001010111"7 


“No spares!” 


journey, since the specialists are al- 
ready discussing the problem of in- 
creasing the convenience of automatic 
programming. And the paramount pro- 
blem here is said to be the liberation 
of the algorithmic language from its 
directivity, from its adaptation to 
specific fields of action, to specific 
class of problems. 


LINGUISTICS, MATHEMATICAL 


lables, between phonemes and mor-. 


A scientific discipline 

making use 

of mathematical methods 

to study language 

and utilizing electronic computers 
to model language 

and the operations 

performed with it by man. 


Words and Numbers 


Linguistics was until quite recent- 
ly considered to be one of the most 
“unmathematical”, most descriptive 
sciences, and nowadays one hears 
people talk of mathematical linguis- 
tics. 

The introduction into the linguis- 
tics of quantitative and theory-of- 
probability methods imparted elements 
of rigour and precision to this huma- 
nitarian science, in the same way as 
the theory of probability revolutio- 
nized physics. 

The scope of problems the new sci- 
ence deals with is very wide. To begin 
with let’s take a look at one interes- 
ting trend—the quantitative descrip- 
tion of language. 

In the opinion of specialists every 
language is characterized by some 
simple quantitative relations. How 
many words are there in different lan- 
guages, what is the difference between 
the number of words and that of 
morphemes and phonemes? What’s 
the relation between words and syl- 


phemes? 

Don’t these questions seem to you 
to be too “narrow”, just “questions 
for the sake of questions”? They do, 
don’t they? Still, mathematical re- 
search into the language is no play 
for scientists, it’s not idle pedantry. 
The practical importance of such an 
approach to the language is very great. 
It’s the quantitative characteristics 
that throw light on the nature of an 
unknown written language, help to 
unveil it. They are useful, as well, 
for the description of modern langua- 
ges, for the study of their history, 
for establishing kinship among them. 

The statistical approach sometimes 
brings startling results. For example, 
it turns out that such obviously 
different from our point of view lan- 
guages as Russian, English, Samoan 
have very nearly the same amount of 
information falling on the letter “N”, 
i.e. a little over four binary units 
(bits). 

Such “curiosities”, such precise cha- 
racteristics play a very important 
part in the compilation of dictiona- 
ries for computer translation, in the 
teaching of foreign languages, even 
in the elucidation of specific prob- 
lems of experimental psychology. 

The prominent Soviet mathemati- 
cian, Academician A.N. Kolmogorov 
made an analysis of the relation be- 
tween the number of available words 
and the number of possible rhymes. 
It turned out that ten words is not 
nearly enough to enable a rhyming 
pair to be chosen. Twenty words, too, 
do not guarantee such a choice. A 
reserve of 4100 words, on the other 
hand, enables three rhyming words 


181) 


182 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


This is not a chaotic pile-up of letters. 
The dimensions of each letter of the Rus- 
sian ABC correspond to its relative frequen- 
cy of appearance in texts. 


to be found, 200 words enable quad- 
ruple rhymes to be found. Hence, 
with 200 words one can write sonets. 
A reserve of 500 words provides for 
the poets an abundance of tenfold 
rhymes. 

The interrelation of letters in words, 
too, was the subject of calculations. 
Were all combinations of letters pos- 
sible, with the aid of 30 letters one 
could compile 30 single-letter words. 
The number of two-letter words would 
be 30?=900. The number of three- 


How does a computer write? 


letter words 30°=27 000. The num- 
ber of four-letter words 304=810 000, 
and so on. A language contains some 
50 thousand words in common use. 
If we assume that all words are of 
seven letters, the percentage of letter 
combinations that are actually words 
will be only 0.0002%. 

The frequency of appearance of 
different letters in words is not the 
same, too. Various texts were studied 
to find this frequency. For instance, 
it was established that in the Rus- 
sian language the relative frequencies 
are: A—6.2%, O—9%, U—6.2%, H— 
5.3%, IO—0.6%, etc. 

The probability of appearance of 
each letter may serve aS a measure 
of the “information load” it carries. 

The results of such research carried 
out by linguists-mathematicians are 
of great interest also to pure linguists 
studying languages, and to experts 
in literature studying how authors 
work with the language and trying to 
discover the secrets of their art. 

Mathematical linguistics, using the 
statistical analysis of language struc- 
ture as a basis, constructs models of 
the language with the aid of electro- 
nic computers. “Literary talents” of 
electronic computers are just an ex- 
ample of such models of “operations 
that man performs with the lang- 
uage”. 


The computer learned how to synthesize phrases on the basis of the statistical 
analysis of the language. Hence, it will not be difficult for it to synthesize, i.e. 
to build according to a programme, sentences from the reserve of words recorded 
in the computer memory. It makes no difference to the computer what to look 
for—for a coded word or for a coded number. To practise the “art of letters” with 
a computer one should give it a dictionary in which related concepts are designa- 


ted by close code numbers: 


1001001 — animal 
1000100—bird 
1001101—eagle, etc. 


LINGUISTICS, MATHEMATICAL 183 


In compliance with the programme and with this code the computer will choose 
words close in meaning. The initial text introduced into the computer will serve 
as a basis for this “creative” work. The “work of literature” is produced in cyc- 
les. With each cycle of programme repetition the computer extends the basic text, 
every time departing from it still further, however not beyond reasonable limits, 
so that the text would not lose sense altogether. 

This is followed by a process of constructing phrases. Using the programme 
instructions the computer combines all the words into sentences in accordance 


with the rules of grammar. 


And now some examples of 
computer literature—in recent years 
a veritable “collection of works” 
written by different computers has 
been built up. 


how to write white verse. The word 
reserve of the poet is 130 words. The 
metre of the verse is strictly fixed. 
The computer writes 150 quatrains 
per minute. It doesn’t name its verses, 


The computer “RCA-301” learned 


Verse No. 027 


While life creates false totally empty images, 
While slow time flows past useful deeds, 

And the stars dejectedly orbit the skies, 
People cannot smile. 


Poem No. 929 


As sleep blindly streamed 

Over shattered hopes, 

Cosmos exuded with pain over ruined love. 
Your light was slowly exiled 

Out of secret men 

And the skies slumbered not. 


just numerates them. 


And here’s an example of the writings of MUC—the “electronic brain” of 
the University of Manchester. 


A Love Letter 


My little treasure! My comprehensible devotion 
wonderfully attracts your tender delight. You 
are my loving adoration, my breast-widening 
adoration. My brotherly feeling with secret breath 
awaits your dear restlessness. The adoration of 
my love tenderly keeps your greedy zeal. 

Your lovesick MUC 


|} TER RECORDED 


IN ITS MEMORY 


Fania | 


a i fi 


THE MACHINE WORKS 


OUT A DEFINITE 


SEQUENCE OF WORDS 


LINGUISTICS, MATHEMATICAL 185 


And here’s another author—the French computer “Calioppe”. 
Excerpt from a Story 


My horizon consists entirely of the red cur- 
tain from which suffocating heat emanates at 
intervals. The mystical silhoutte of a woman, 
proud and terrible, can barely be discerned. She 
is a lady of noble birth, probably one of the sea- 
sons. It appears she is saying goodbye. I’m not 
able to see anything more and move towards the 
curtain. My hands draw it apart convulsively. 
There on the other side opens a strange tragic land- 
scape: tsivetta scratches the earth, birds fly 
from both sides and come down on the branches 
of trees half-withered. Here, too, is a tortoise 
resting motionless: it sensed my presence. But 
why is it covered with frost? A boy comes running 
along, his plump hands, his serious dark face 


&lt; 


make him look like a young hero. 


A striking resemblance of computer 
“literature” to formalistic writings 
of some ultra-fashionable Western au- 
thors lies on the surface. The fact 
that programmes for computers and 
the word reserves for them are pre- 
pared by men is, probably, not the 
least cause for this. In short, the com- 
puter authors produce what’s asked 
of them! 

As has already been pointed out, 
the statistical approach to the lan- 
guage is one of the methods of mathe- 
matical linguistics. Another method 
not inferior in interest and impor- 
tance is the comparison of natural 
languages and the artificial languages 
of mathematical logic. Aided by ma- 
thematical statistics, information the- 


The anatomy of mechanical composition. 
1—birds of prey 

2—daylight birds of prey 

38—Falconidae family 

4—eagle 

5—steppe eagle 


ory, theory of probability and by 
other sciences, mathematical linguis- 
tics constructs new, more flexible, 
more simple artificial languages for 
electronic computers. 

In this field there is yet another 
research tool—the so-called analy- 
sing grammatical models and models 
of initiating grammars. These frigh- 
tening specialized terms conceal the 
effort of mathematical linguistics to 
construct multi-purpose language mo- 
dels. 

For what specific purposes? Here 
we have to restrict ourselves to the 
statement that the sphere of applica- 
tion of mathematical linguistics is a 
wide one: the creation of formal com- 
puter languages, computer translation, 


186 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


the reading of forgotten written lan- 
guages, etc. Each of these applications 
is exciting, full of surprises and has 
a great practical value. 

A few concrete examples will suffice 
to convince you. 

It’s the job of mathematical lin- 
guistics to find optimum ways of 
translating texts from an ordinary 
language, i.e. Russian, English or 
some other, into the computer logi- 
cal language, which alone is under- 
stood by computers. Mathematical 


linguistics is also working on the 
problems of recording human speech 
for the purposes of constructing auto- 
matic stenographers and reading auto- 
mata. Great is the humanitarian role 
of this science in the field of research 
related to the use of computers for 
facilitating communications between 
deaf and blind people. 

Mathematical linguistics has made 
a promising start. This gives reason 
to hope for a successful and produc- 
tive future. 


'How is my new novel going?" 
"Sorryy you'll have to be overhauled,” 


LOGIC, MATHEMATICAL 


187 


The science 

which studies forms of reasoning 
and proofs 

by mathematical methods. 


Three Jinns 


There is hardly a schoolboy who 
doesn't know what algebra is. Chil- 
dren study algebraic problems at 
school, write algebraic expressions 
of letters and numbers connected by 
the signs of operations such as addi- 
tion, subtraction, multiplication and 
division. 

Has it crossed your mind that since 
in algebra operations are performed 
with letter symbols there may also 
exist an algebra of the language—an 
algebra which would enable answers 
to questions to be calculated in the 
Same way as answers to problems are 
calculated? 

The philosopher of the ancient 
Greeks Aristotle who lived in the 
4th century B.C. initiated the scien- 
ce of logic—the science of reasoning 
correctly, the science dealing with 
the forms and the laws of thinking. 
He analysed human thought in the 
forms of concepts, judgements, con- 
clusions and scrutinized it from the 
structural, or formal, aspect. This 
was the beginning of formal logic— 
the science which tries to reveal the 
secrets of our reasoning, the science 


which studies logical operations and 
rules of thought. 


In the Middle. Ages these attempts 
led to the idea that it is possible to 
arrive at various truths with the aid 
of mere combinations of general con- 
cepts. “Thinking machines” were even 
built for this purpose. The philoso- 
phers of the Middle Ages dreamed to 
solve with their help all the problems 
of science, all the riddles of life, all 
the mysteries of Heaven and Earth. 
The design of the “thinking machine” 
of the philosopher, theologist and 
alchemist of the Middle Ages Raimon 
Lull was quite simple. Nine ques- 
tions were written along the circum- 
ference of a big stationary disc: 
“How much?”, “Which of the two?”, 
“When?”, “Where?”, “What quali- 
ty?” and others of the same sort. 
Inside this disc five additional discs 
of decreasing diameter were arranged 
one on top of the other. They could 
rotate independently. Each disc was 
divided into nine sectors (chambers), 
containing inscriptions. One disc con- 
tained the names of nine principal 
sins and virtues, the other—of nine 
principal physical properties. 

Lull stuffed the chambers with all 
the wisdom known to him. He turned 
some of the discs one, two or three 
points, leaving the others (i.e. the 
first, the second, the first and the 
third, the fifth and the second) sta- 
tionary. And each time different word 
combinations appeared against the 
questions inscribed on the stationary 
disc. 

Obviously, such a machine could 
solve no logic problems. Its “revela- 
tions” looked more like absurdities. 
This was quite natural, since its in- 


188. CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


ventor Raimon Lull, though he na- 
med his creation an “object of great 
art”, had no idea of the rules of ma- 
thematical logic which serve as a 
basis for the operation of modern 
logical computers. 

The great German mathematician 
and philosopher Gottfried Wilhelm 
Leibnitz is considered to be the foun- 
der of mathematical logic. He was 
the first to try, in the 17th century, 
to construct logical calculus of the 
arithmetical and algebraic types. He 
narrowed the gap between logic and 
calculations, improved and specified 
the symbolics of logic. 

On the foundation laid by Leib- 
nitz another great mathematician Ge- 
orge Boole, father of E. Voynich, the 
author of the novel The Gadfly, built 
the temple of a new discipline—the 
mathematical logic. He devised a 
special algebra adapted to logic con- 
structions. As distinct from ordinary 
algebra, this algebra uses symbols to 
designate not numbers, but statements. 

When children learn to count, they 
are embarrassed when having lear- 
ned, for example, how to add two 
apples and three apples, they have 
to add three houses and two houses. 
But later at school the children get 
it into their heads that numbers 
exist by themselves and do not ne- 
cessarily serve to designate the num- 
ber of apples, houses, cars, etc. Chil- 
dren learn when studying algebra 
that the concept a? is much wider 
than 13 apples multiplied by 13. 

The same is true of mathematical 
logic—one has to abstract himself 
from the contents of statements. They 
are of no importance to mathematical 
logic, just as algebra is indifferent to 
what xz stands for—the number of 
fish, cars or stars. 


Since in this logic we are dealing 
with mathematics the concrete mea- 
ning of a statement is of no impor- 
tance to it. One thing only is impor- 
tant—whether a given statement is 
true or false. 

Note also the following. Actually 
everyone of us, so to speak, devotes 
all his time to practising formal lo- 
gic. Involuntarily we, especially when 
trying to stress our point, adapt our- 
selves to the laws of linguistic algeb- 
ra, for (in the opinion of the specia- 
lists) the mathematical logic can be 
said to form the “skeleton of our 
thought”. It serves as a basis—natu- 
rally, in a very broad sense—for the 
general properties of statements and 
of reasoning. 

Imagine yourselves answering the 
question “Why is it light in dayti- 
me?” with the words “Because light 
shines in daytime”. 

You have violated the rules of logic, 
the logic of reasoning, for you haven't 
explained anything. Unsubstantiated 
method of thinking of this sort was 
branded by Moliére in his immortal 
comedy Le Malade imaginaire. In 
the course of the play a bachelor of 
science is being examined: “Why 
does opium promote sleep?” The ba- 
chelor’s answer is: “Because it con- 
tains soporific power, which is Ca- 
pable of lulling senses to sleep.” As 
we see from this example, here the 
words of normal language taken to- 
gether in context are devoid of clear, 
precise meaning. 

There is an ancient reasoning that 
became a classical example of logical 
proof: «All men are mortal. Socrates 
is a man. Therefore, Socrates is mor- 
tal.” 

Scientists invented unique symbols 
to enable precise meaning to be attri- 


buted to words. This system of sym- 
bols enables the logical structure of 
an idea or of a judgement to be disco- 
vered. With the aid of precise defini- 
tions of words it is possible to calcu- 
late the interconnections between sym- 
bols of words, the relationships exis- 
ting between them. Things which 
were formerly difficult to express in 
words of the normal language can 
now be easily represented by symbol 
of mathematical logic. 

Here’s a simple example: ‘H,O is 
the symbol of water. It states that 
there are two atoms of hydrogen and 
one of oxygen to a molecule of water. 
In this transcription the facts relate 
to chemistry, the numbers to mathe- 
matics and the symbols to the logic 
of symbols. ; 

Let’s undertake a step-by-step in- 
cursion into the laws of logic. Three 
different forms in which thought 
is realized are considered in logic: 
concept, judgement and deduction. 

“This inscribed angle, resting on 
the diameter” is a concept. In case not 
all the angles are embraced by it, 
it is a singular concept. “All inscri- 
bed angles, resting on the diameter, 
are right angles” is already a judge- 
ment, since it reveals the properties 
of the object of judgement. 

The process of deducing a third 
judgement out of the two is called 
deduction. Its principal form in logic 
is called the syllogism. One of the 
judgements in the syllogism—the ge- 
neral one—is called the major premi- 
se, the other judgement—the speci- 
fic one—is called the minor premise, 


LOGIC, MATHEMATICAL 189 


and the deduced judgement is called 
the conclusion. 

Let’s take the judgement “A1ll com- 
puters make man’s work easier” as 
the major premise, and the judge- 
ment “The arithmometer is a compu- 
ter” as the minor premise. Then the 
conclusion drawn from these judge- 
ments will be “The arithmometer 
makes man’s work easier”. 

The judgements may be true or 
false. If they are true, then, provided 
we adhere to certain rules of construc- 
ting syllogisms, we shall always ob- 
tain correct conclusions, true inferen- 
ces from the judgements, as, for 
example, our conclusion about the 
arithmometer. 

But if, while adhering to the rules 
of syllogism construction, we obtain 
a false conclusion, this means that 
at least one premise was not correct. 

And vice versa, if all the premises 
were true judgements, but the deduc- 
tion resulted in a false conclusion, 
this means that some law of syllogism 
Construction was violated. We may 
obtain the absurd conclusion “All 
pupils are poor pupils”, if we con- 
struct the syllogism incorrectly: “Pet- 
rov is a poor pupil. Petrov is a pupil.” 

It turns out that the solution of 
every logical problem, as well as a 
mathematical problem, has its own 
“technology”. It’s made up of ele- 
mentary operations resembling addi- 
tion and multiplication. There are 
special rules for these operations, and 
with their aid anyone is able to solve 
a complex logical problem. The same 
is true of an automatic computer. 


A logical problem for the computer must be expressed in formulae. 


It’s quite a commonplace thing to transform quantitative relationships expres- 
sed in numbers into formulae. But is there a way of compressing into formulae 


190 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


arbitrary logical judgements? For example, how should the judgement “I shall 
certainly go to the football match if I get a ticket, or if a friend invites me, and 
if it is not raining” be represented by a formula? 

Well, there is a way. But some logical judgements are needed, by way of ex- 
planation. 

The judgement of the football fan contains several reservations. Here they are: 

4. I will get a ticket. 

2. I will be invited by a friend. 

3. It will be raining. 

Simple judgements may be interconnected by the words OR, AND, NOT. Com- 
posite statements are always expressed by simple ones with the aid of these words. 
They, like three jinns, can do everything in logic. 

We can agree to designate each of these words, for the sake of brevity, by some 
symbol, just as in mathematics corresponding signs are used instead of the words 
“plus”, “minus”, “multiply”, “divide”. 

The word OR is usually designated by a cross (+), and the word AND, by the 
sign of multiplication—the point (-). 

Now it remains, for the sake of brevity, to introduce a letter for each statement. 
Its negation, i.e. the word NOT, will be designated by the same letter, but with 
a dash on top. For example: 

I will get a ticket—T. I will get no ticket—T. 

I will be invited by a friend—F. I will not be invited by a friend—F. 

It’s going to rain—R. It’s not going to rain—R. 

Now we shall write with the aid of these symbols the composite statement “I 
will get a ticket, and it’s not going to rain, or I will be invited by a friend, and 


it’s not going to rain”. 
A M=(T+F)-R ——-. 


LOGIC, MATHEMATICAL 
Here it is: 
T.R+F.R 


As in algebra, the common multiplier can be taken out of the brackets. Now 
the formula will take the form: 


(T+F)-R 


It reads as follows: “I will get a ticket, or I will be invited by a friend, and it’s 
not goint to rain.” 

This composite statement of our football fan is tantamount to the condition 
of his going to the match which we shall designate by the letter M. 

Now the statement can be expressed by a very brief formula 


M=(T+F)-R 


As you know, every logical judgement may be either true or false. It’s been 
agreed in mathematical logic that true statements be expressed by one, and false 
by zero. Again 1 and 0. “I’ve learned all the lessons”—this was what a pupil 
told her class instructor. Let’s designate this statement for the sake of brevity by 
the letter L. If this statement of the girl is true, L=1. Thus, if L=1, L=0, since 
in this case the statement “I have not learned my lessons” would be false. 

And vice versa, had the pupil not learned her lessons, L=0 and L=1. 

This is a general rule in logic. If some statement B=1, then B=O, and vice ver- 
sa: if B=0, then B=1. 

It remains for us to observe a few additional propositions of mathematical logic 
to know all its principal laws. 

Obviously, B+B=B and B-B=B. , 

Clearly, the composite statement “I’m going for a walk or I’m going for a walk” 
is fully identical to the simple one “I’m going for a walk”. Similarly “The recei- 
ver will work and the receiver will work” is tantamount to the simple statement 
“The receiver will work”. 

Two following propositions are just as obvious: 


B+B=1 and B-B=0 


Indeed, the composite statement “It’s going to rain, or it’s not going to rain” 
is true in both cases—it’s always true. 

Such a weather forecast would always be correct. True, it would be of little use 
to anyone. 


The composite statement “TV set is on and TV set is off”, on the other hand, 
is always false. Opposite judgements connected by AND can never be true. 

Now, after we have transformed logic into formulae, let’s ask ourselves the 
question: can truth be “calculated”? The answer turns out to be “Yes”. 


194 


192 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


There is a book called Mathemati- 
cal Wit—a collection of mini-prob- 
lems for sharpening wits. It contains 
all sorts of bright problems, mathema- 
tical games and tricks. The chapter 
“Mathematics Almost Free from Cal- 
culations” deals with problems the 
solution of which entails the construc- 
tion of a chain of sophisticated and 
acute arguments. One of the prob- 
lems—“A Criminal Story”—suits well 
to illustrate this tale of mathematical 
logic. Here is this problem in a slight- 
ly corrected form adapted for this 
book. 

It’s a sad story. In one of the 
school’s classrooms a window has 
been broken. Only one out of four pu- 
pils: Lenya, Dima, Tolya and Misha, 
could have been the culprit. 

In the course of interrogation each 
of them gave three answers. 

Lenya: 1. I’m not guilty. 2. I ha- 
ven’t even been near the window. 
3. Misha knows who’s done it. 

Dima: 1. It wasn’t I who broke 
the window. 2. I didn’t know Misha 
until I came to this school. 3. Tolya’s 
done it. 

Tolya: 1, I’m not guilty. 2. Misha’s 
done it. 3. Dima is telling a lie say- 
ing I’ve done it. 

Misha: 1. I’m not guilty. 2. Lenya 
has broken the window. 3. Dima can 
vouch for me as he knows me from the 
day of my birth. 

In the course of further interroga- 
tions each of the pupils said that one 
of his statements was false while 
two were true. 

Let’s try and find the culprit with 
the aid of mathematical logic. 

We know that every composite sta- 


tement of each of them, if true, is 
equal to one, and if false—to zero. 

This means that the composite sta- 
tement of each boy will be true if the 
first and the second statements are 
true, and the third false, or if the 
first and the third are true and the 
second false, or if the second and the 
third are true, and the first false. 

We will denote each pupil by his 
initial letter and his statements by 
subscripts. Thus 


L= L,-L,- Ls + Ly-Lg-Ls + L,-Le-Lg 
D = D,-D,-Ds +D,-D,-Ds+D,-D,-Ds 
T —= T,-T,-Ts + T,-T,-Ts + T,-T,-Ts 
M = M,-M,-M; + M,-M,-M; + M,- 
2°Ms 

If we read the statements carefully 
we will not fail to notice that the 
first and the third statements of Tolya 
are equivalent: obviously, the mean- 
ing of the statements “I’m not guil- 
ty” and “Dima is telling a lie saying 
that I’ve done it” is, in essence, the 
same. Hence, T,=T,, and T;=T,. 
Now Tolya’s statement can be re- 
written in the form 


T=T,-T,-T,+T,-T,-T,+T,-T,-T,, or 
T=(T,- T)-T,+(T,-Ty - T, + 
+ (T,- T;)- Ts 

We know already that contradicto- 
ry statements are untrue. Therefore, 
(T,-T,) =0. If one of the multipli- 
cants is zero, Tolya’s statement will 
assume the form T=T,-T,-T;= 
=T,-T,. It will be true and, hence, 
equal to one, if both of the multipli- 
cants are equal to one. 


NOT, AND, OR in electronic circuits and their analogues. &gt;» 


194 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Therefore, T,=1 and T,=1, or T,= 
=(0. Thus we have obtained that the 
first statement of Tolya is true, and 
the second false. Since his words were: 
4. I’m not guilty. 2. Misha’s done it. 
3. Dima is telling a lie saying I’ve 
done it—it’s clear that the window 
had not been broken by Tolya or 
Misha. 

This simultaneously proves the 
third of Dima’s statements accusing 
Tolya of the crime to be untrue. Hen- 
ce, Ds=0 and D,=1. So in the for- 
mula for Dima’s statement the last 
two of the items will turn zero, and 
it will assume the simple form 


D=D,-D,-D, 


We have obtained already D,=1, hen- 
ce, D,=1 and D,=1. 

The first and the third statements 
of Dima are true, and this proves 
him to be innocent. 

The third of Misha’s statements 
controvenes the second statement of 
Dima. Let’s write M,;=D,. Hence, 
M,=0, and M,=1. Now Misha’s 
statement is as follows: 


M = M, * M, - Ms 
It will be true only ifM,=—1, M,=1. 


M,=1. Misha’s second statement is 
true. The window was broken by Le- 
nya. Thus the formulae of mathema- 
tical logic enabled us to find the cul- 
prit quickly and unmistakenly. 

In the course of computer progress 
mathematical logic became intimate- 
ly connected with computer mathe- 
matics and with all problems relating 
to the construction and programming 
of electronic computers. 

The start was made when scientists 
initially suggested the possibility of 


constructing electrical circuits on the 
basis of mathematical logic. Next 
such circuits were assembled. Now 
computers are being built on the ba- 
sis of all types of electronic circuits. 

Now look. Suppose we agree to de- 
signate contacts closing a circuit in 
the presence of signals a and b by the 
same letters a@ and b and contacts 
breaking the circuit in the presence 
of these signals by the symbols a’ 
and b’ and, moreover, agree to de- 
signate the parallel and series connec- 
tions of these contacts by the signs 
of addition and multiplication, then 
we will find that operations a’, a+b, 
ab are performed according to rules 
of logical negation (NOT), addition 
(OR) or logical multiplication (AND). 
A closed circuit is in this case 1 
(truth), an open circuit 0 (lie). 

Imagine an electric circuit consist- 
ing, for example, of a voltage source, 
an alarm and two switches. In such 
a circuit to sound the alarm both 
switches have to be switched on. 
This is called the coincidence circuit, 
or the logical AND circuit. 

An output signal appears only in 
case both signals coincide in time. 

Let’s connect both switches in pa- 
rallel in another circuit. To sound 
the alarm one OR the other switch 
should be switched on. This is called 
the separation circuit. It performs 
the logical OR operation. The cir- 
cuit allows voltages from different 
lines to be applied to one point with- 
out connecting these lines. 

The negation, or the logical NOT 
circuit, can be called an inverted cir- 
cuit. It has one input and one output. 
But the output signal appears only 
in the absence of the input signal. 

There is, naturally, no sense in in- 
serting circuits with switches into 


high-speed electronic computers. Here 
the job is done by electron devices. 
They perform the same logical opera- 
tions, but at enormous speeds. 

Here, for example, are three elec- 
tron-tube circuits. The first NOT, the 
second AND, and the third OR. How 
do they work? 

Let’s make use of the analogy be- 
tween the electric and water currents. 
See how the level of water in the ves- 
sels drops and you'll understand eve- 
rything. If the slide valve is NOT 
moved, the level of water in the ves- 
sel will drop. If the first AND the 
second slide valves are moved, the 
level of water in the vessel will drop. 
If the first OR the second slide valve 
is moved, the level of water in the 
vessel will drop. 

Something of the sort takes place 
in the electron tubes as well. The only 
difference is that electric current 
flows instead of water. Instead of 
water levels we have output voltages, 
and the circuits are controlled not by 
slide valves, but by current pulses. 

Thus, we have obtained circuits 
fur realizing the three principal lo- 
gical operations: the omnipotent 


LOGIC, MATHEMATICAL 195 


AND, OR, NOT, so to speak, materia- 
lized in the substance of wires and 
tubes. They enable the computer to 
“reason” in the course of its work: 
AND—to connect, OR—to choose, 
NOT—to negate. 

If one recollects that the trigger 
in showing one and zero seems to say 
“yes” or “no”, it will become clear: 
the computer language, despite its 
scarcity, enables all numbers and all 
words to be coded and logical reason- 
ing to be performed. 

The application of the calculus of 
statements in automata, in electro- 
nic circuits connects mathematical 
logic with cybernetics, on one hand, 
and makes this abstract science bring 
practical results, on the other. In 
plain words, mathematical logic is 
active everywhere, where electronic 
computers are at work, for every prob- 
lem is solved by computers in compli- 
ance with its immutable laws. 

But this is only one aspect of the 
problem. The other is that the com- 
puter circuits themselves, and their 
elements, are being analysed and de- 
veloped with the aid of mathematical 
logic. 


EY. 


0 


“Its answers are ambiguous, sometimes.” 


196 


M 


MICROMINIATURIZATION 


A trend 

in the progress of technology 
aimed at reducing the dimensions, 
weight and energy consumption 

of equipment, 

at improving its reliability 

and facilitating the automation 
of its production. 


Where Is the Midget Moving? 


If the designers of electronic compu- 
ters were to have a song of their trade 
it would surely have the refrain 
“Smaller, still smaller...” 

Judge for yourselves. 

There is “Eniac”, the one-time idol 
of computer operators—an intricate 


‘collossus weighing 30 tons and occu- 


pying a hall of 150 square metres and 
containing 40 separate panels, 18 
thousand tubes, 1500 electromecha- 
nical relays. 

Impressive numbers! 

And the other veteran—“Tridag”? 

It occupied a whole building hous- 
ing transformers, electric motors, air- 
cooling plants and pumping stations. 
They all served 8 thousand tubes and 
2 thousand relays. 

In our time the fate of a computer 
somewhat resembles the fickle fate 
of many films. Barely has it succee- 
ded in making the world gasp as it 
becomes a museum exhibit, a greater 
rarity than, say, a car made at the 
beginning of the century. Such 
was the fate of the first computers. 

Why were those giants so short- 
lived? Why did those “mastodonts” 
of computer technology perish? Main 
reasons for this were their large di- 
mensions and, of course, slow ope- 
rating speeds. The operating speeds 
of those giants, though rather high 
for those times, were still slow— 
some tens or hundreds of calculati- 
ons per second, not more. 

Yet the problems put forward by 
modern science and technology were 
such that the mere thought of solving 
them could take the breath away. 


The need arose of performing tens of 
trillions of arithmetical operations. 
Even with a speed of ten thousand 
operations per second it would take 
a high-speed computer over four years 
of continuous operation to do the 
job. For instance, the solution of a 
problem relating to planning and con- 
trol of the economy requires 
40 000 000 000 000 000—a number 
with sixteen zeros (10!*)—calculations 
to be performed. 

Three and a half million slow-speed 
computers would be needed to comple- 
te this enormous job. This is unfe- 
asible. Only one alternative remains 
—to make the computers work faster. 

Working eight hours a day you 
could count to a million in three and a 


MICROMINIATURIZATION 197 


The computer does it quicker. But 
how much quicker? In a day, an hour, 
a minute? 

How many. times quicker—that is 
the question. And then: what should 
high-speed computers look like, what 
elements should they be made of, 
what will their dimensions be? 

Now that computer engineering has 
its history we can glancing back per- 
ceive the changes that the computers 
have undergone from generation to 
generation, and follow the trend of 
their development. 

The ancestors of present-day compu- 

ers were the electromechanical slug- 
frais into which all the ingenuity of 
the fourties was packed. Their time 
of operation was in the milliseconds 


half months. A billion would take 
you ... 500 years to count. 


range. 


The first generation of modern computers announced its appearance by a steady 


hum of electron tubes in grey metal cabinets. Their life was not a very long one— 
from 1946 to 1957. The density of elements was 0.01-0.10 per cubic centimetre. 

Operating speeds were already in the microseconds range. As soon as these com- 
puters began to display first signs of intelligence people hurried to brand them 
“thinking machines” and began feverishly making estimates as to what the 
dimensions of computers comparable to the human brain would be. The result was 
discouraging. The “electronic brain” would be as big as the biggest skyscraper. 
It would need a Niagara Falls to cool it. 

The computers of the second generation began to take shape already within the 
first generation. 

The main part in the computers of the second generation is played by semicon- 
ductors. The best electron tube works not more than 5 thousand hours, while a 
semiconductor device works 70 thousand hours. Alongside the envelope of a tube 
the semiconductor device the size of a match head looks quite a dwarf. It proved 
to have many valuable qualities: the reliability of the new computers increased, 
their energy consumption was low, and they could do well without cooling. Their 
dimensions decreased so drastically that designers began talking of table calcula- 
tors to replace traditional arithmometers. ‘ 

And what about speeds? A tenth or a hundredth of a second per operation? No, 
much faster—some thousandths or even ten-thousandths. 

As the computers of the second generation appeared it became clear that the 
method to minimize their dimensions in future should consist not merely in dimi- 


Information recording density (in a specified volume) 


Transistorized circuits 


} 
} 
} 
Laser circuits OO) nye ed 
PEERS 
Thin film circuits yas 
Electron tube circuits | 
i 


ai = 


MICROMINIATURIZATION 199 


nishing the volume of various blocks of the computer as a whole but should be 
based, in the first place, on minimizing the dimensions of separate components, 
on increasing their packing density with a simultaneous decrease in the number 
and length of all connections between the blocks. Now the designers went to any 
length to make a midget out of the computer. 

And the simple transistor which recently was triumphantly marching through 
the entire electronics has modestly relegated to the background. Instead, new 
components took up the struggle for minimum dimensions and maximum speeds 
of computers. Great was their number: optotrons and cryotrons, high-frequency 
transistors and tunnel diodes, spacistors and twistors, biaxes and transfluxors, 
persistors and cryosars, parametric devices and technetrons. A tenfold decrease 
in the volume of various apparatus became at once a reality. And operating speeds 
shifted to the hundred thousandths and even millionths of a second range. 

But even this colourful array of subminiature, ultra-fast, super-reliable compo- 
nents soon made way for thin films—the building stones of third-generation com- 
puters. 

Three generations of computers in the spell of twenty years! 

At the beginning of the fifties—tube computers, at the beginning of the sixties 
—transistorized computers, and at the beginning of the seventies—computers on 
integrated circuits (thin films). 

With the aid of these new building stones it proved possible to build a world 
of tiny giants, to erect electronic cities of unusual architecture. Recently, the de- 
signer would proudly demonstrate a computing block of the computer the size of 
a tin of sardines. Now, engineers dream of packing 350 thousand circuits into 
one cubic decimetre. 

Where do these magic qualities of the thin film stem from that allow engineers 
to achieve so much? 

Usually films are produced by evaporation. The appropriate material is heated 
in vacuum under ambient pressure of a thousand millionth of an atmosphere. The 
material evaporates and condenses on a glass or a metal plate. This fine work is 
made much more intricate by the necessity of arranging the particles not arbitra- 
rily but in accordance with a strict pattern. “Electronic stitching” is based on the 
process of condensation through the slits of a mask repeated many times. The 
structure of the layers of the film used in circuits—there may be ten, fifteen or 
more of them—must coincide exactly. To show the difficulty of this job it suffices 
to state the thickness of the film—it’s only 100 Angstréms (one hundred thou- 
sandth of a millimetre thick). The right to use the word thickness with the film 
being thinner than a ten thousandth of the thickness of a safety razor blade re- 
mains in itself questionable. 

This film circuits are complete electronic. circuits. Thus we witness not the art 
of assembling circuits from separate blocks, from separate building stones, but 
asupreme mastery of matter when every particle of it in compliance with the 
wishes of the creator occupies a place allotted to it. 

This is the quality that now assumes major importance for computer designers. 


&lt;q The path of microminiaturization. 


200 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Millions of devices per cubic milli- 
metre in conjunction with speeds of 
millions of operations per second. 

Operating speeds of third-genera- 
tion computers are expected to rise 
by about two orders of magnitude: 
108 operations per second, that’s what 
their speed is going to be. This is 
only an order of magnitude less than 
the limit set by the velocity of elec- 
tric pulse propagation in solids. 

And the fourth generation? These 
computers are still more advanced. 
Speeds up to 10° operations per se- 
cond, a working memory store hous- 
ing 10° bits of special inter-computer 
information units. This unit is equi- 
valent to two decimal digits or one 
ABC sign. This amount of 108 bits is 
simply hard to imagine. Let us by 
way of an example translate the volu- 
me of computer external memory sto- 
te exceeding 10” signs into the “book 
language”. The result will be mil- 
lions of volumes of 500 pages each! 

The fourth-generation computers 
boasting such parameters and such a 
structure are, in effect, real communi- 
ties of the second- and third-genera- 
tion computers. This trick was ac- 
complished with the aid of a new sub- 
miniaturization instrument, the BIC. 
Big Integrated Circuits represent 
structural complexes of numerous ele- 
ments. Just compare: the envelope 
of one semiconductor device houses 
only the device itself, of an integra- 
ted circuit—up to ten devices, and 
of a big integrated circuit—over a 
hundred. And this is not the limit. 
In the future BIC will, probably, grow 
to become GIC—Gigantic Integrated 
Circuits — containing several thousand 
elements. 

GIC may be regarded as the build- 
ing blocks for fifth-generation compu- 


ters, or, to be more exact, of highly 
productive communities of entire com- 
puter systems with a total memory 
of billions of bits and operation 
speeds of billions of operations per 
second. 

An absolute superiority of midgets 
over giants! The midgets won again, 
having succeeded in opening the doors 
of the kingdom, unseen and unheard- 
of before, of the kingdom the entrance 
to which bore the inscription “na- 
nosecond”—a billionth of a second. 

Such computer speeds, though it 
sounds like a paradox, can be neither 
seen nor imagined, but they can be 
attained and utilized. 

This marks a complete triumph of 
technology: something has been made 
by hand that defies imagination. 

However, as is often the case in 
technology, every new achievement 
creates a new problem. 

The limit for the speed of operation 
of third-generation computers is set 
by the velocity of propagation of 
electric pulses in solids. 

To overcome the problem one has 
to make a detour. 

The way as the specialists see it is as 
follows. Microscopic devices have been 
designed for the conversion of elec- 
tric signals into light signals, and vice 
versa. 

Simultaneously fibre optics has co- 
me into existence. The latter makes 
use of thin transparent filaments, 
with the aid of which light can be 
transmitted along any straight or cur- 
ved path connecting the elements of 
the circuit, in the same way as elec- 
trons are transported along metal 
wires. ; 

As a result, in addition to the elec- 
tron the particle of light—the photon 
—was, too, harnessed to the electro- 


nic cart. In opto-electronic systems 
information fluxes flow at the same 
time along electric and optic chan- 
nels, whose joints are provided with 
opto-electronic and electric-optic con- 
verters. The use of optic connections 
and of optic methods of information 
processing has given electronics a new 
degree of freedom, has substantially 
increased its possibilities and opened 
up new horizons. Thus emerges the 
shape of computers of the following 
generations. Life will be blown into 
them not by electric current but by a 
ray of light. Now the phrase “the 
computer radiates thought” will sound 
quite real. 

The principles of design of future 
optic computers will be quite diffe- 
rent from those utilized in the design 
of electronic computers. Light pulses 
of a hundred billionth of a second du- 
ration switch a lazer system on and 
off practically without delay. 

Fantastic speeds led to fantastic 
dimensions of the computer—they ha- 
ve reached the absolute minimum, the 
part of the calculating element in 
them being played by molecules and 
even atoms. The most acute problem 
here is reliability. Since repair work 
on such midget computers is not fea- 
sible they have to work without 
faults. This, the engineers decided, 
could be achieved. Such devices exist. 
For instance, nature has nursed the 
human brain. Its reliability is per- 
fect. It works without repair or stop- 
page about 70 years, despite the 
fact that every hour of human life 
some 1000 neurons die—that makes 
some 500 millions during the whole 
life. 

Then why not make use of nature’s 
ex perience? 

Isn’t the idea of building a compu- 


MICROMINIATURIZATION 201 


ter with the reliability of the brain 
too bold? Isn’t this dream baseless? 
It turns out not. Using fibre glass 


-a laser device can be built that will 


operate on the principles of a living 
neuron. Light-conducting filaments 
will play the part of nerves transport- 
ing impulses. The pattern of operation 
of such a computer will imitate the 
action of the brain’s neurons and the 
nervous system. This hybrid of tech- 
nology and electronics will, in effect, 
make a synthetic brain. 

It would seem that everything that 
could be desired had been realized: 
speeds defying imagination, wonder- 
ful reliability and utmost compact- 
ness. But people with a foresight are 
already able to discern the dim con- 
tours of new machines. 

An attentive reader, you have not 
failed to notice that the description is 
simply “such machines”, without the 
customary epithet “thinking”, or the 
rigorous definition “computing”. 
Why? 

New machines are expected to re- 
volutionize technology in the same 
way as this was done some twenty 
years ago by electronic computers 
which replaced electromechanical cal- 
culators since their speeds will be 
no less than 107° logical operations 
per second. Try and find an epithet 
for such a machine. Their operating 
principles will, too, be quite diffe- 
rent. 

Imagine yourself reading a book 
not line by line but whole pages at 
a glance. 

This is the operating principle of 
the computer, and such projects al- 
ready exist. They will be capable of 
processing incoming data en masse. 
The computer element will perceive 
not a line but a whole picture, nay, 


Micromodule 


MICROCIRCUITS 


Ceramic capacitor 


Microdiode 


Microtransistor 


OPTICAL DEVICE 


Mirror 


LASER CIRCUITS 


ten thousand pictures at once, each 
of which will contain 10 bits of 
information. In these computers you 
will be looking in vain for channels 
transmitting light and electronic sig- 
nals. 

They are strange, almost bodyless 
creatures. 

Their principle of operation, to a 
first approximation, resembles that 
of the epidiascope, which instantly 
displays pictures on a screen and over- 
lays them one on top of the other. 

The computer’s “memory”, if it is 
based on “pictures”, will be able to 
store a huge library of 500 thousand 
volumes. 

The selection of infermation in 
these computers will not be based on 
the address principle when to get to 
the desired cell it is necessary to 
find the approprinte “street” and 
“house”, but on the principle of asso- 
ciations. 

Everything we memorize is inter- 
connected, we memorize groups of 
information, not separate bits. 

That’s how our memory—human 
memory—works. This, too, will be the 
working principle of the new compu- 
ters which have been even before 
their birth romanticaily christened 
“picture logic” computers or “pictu- 
re arithmetic” computers. 

We have just been introduced to 
several generations of computers. Ha- 
ve you noticed how rapidly their ca- 
pabilities increase, and how at the 
same time their dimensions decrease 
at no less a rate? 


The elements of microminiaturization. 


MICROMINIATURIZATION 203 


The rate at which such machines 
depart from machines that we have 
been accustomed to and become so- 
mething defying imagination is quite 
terrific. 

Where does the road of microminia- 
turization take us? Is there a limit to 
computer advancement? 

The history of the generations of 
machines gives a negative answer to 
this question. And what about the 
limitations set by the laws of nature 
to name, for one, the constant veloci- 
ty of light? 

There is no getting away from the 
fact that the rate of information trans- 
fer is limited by the velocity of light. 
Therefore, future optical machines 
must be designed so that light in 
them would have to travel minimum 
distances. It may be conjectured that 
they will be spherical in shape, since 
out of all bodies with an equal vol- 
ume the sphere has the minimum sur- 
face area. 

Going over from our usual world 
into the world of the atom we come 
face to face with new laws, new con- 
ventions. In our world the capacity 
of the computer is limited by the 
maximum density of information 
packed into the computer memory. In 
the world of the atom this is of no 
importance since one cubic centime- 
tre of an absolutely condensed nuc- 
lear matter weighs 114 million tons. 
What an enormous amount of infor- 
mation could be packed into matter 
having such density! And what about 
living matter? Just think about it, 


Micromodules—blocks made of microelements operating as calculating cells. Integrated cir- 
cuits—groups of elements. There are whole associations of them—the BIC—Big Integrated 


Circuits. 


Absolutely new—opto-electronic—devices using lasers. 


204 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


the-material basis of genetic informa- 
tion of the whole population of the 
world—some three billion people— 
could be compressed into the volume 
of a rain drop. 

It would be appropriate to remark 
at this juncture that the nerve elements 
of the human brain—individually— 
act quite slowly. The duration of the 
operating: cycle is almost a second. 
Slow speed is made up for by an enor- 
mous redundancy, since the elements 
are great in number. According to 
theoretical calculations an element 
working at a rate of one millionth of 
a second does the work of a thousand 
elements each working at a rate of 
one thousandth of a second. Natural- 
ly the question arises, won’t the de- 
signers turn back and start trading 
speed for quantity? Before there was 
an obstacle in this way—the dimen- 


sions of computer elements. This obs- 
tacle, as we have just seen, may dis- 
appear in the future. 

Nature’s ingenuity, its ability to 
pack information sparingly, point to 
the shortest road for the computer de- 
signer to take. 

Today it is too early to try to de- 
fine the place future machines will 
occupy in the life of man. What will 
be the job of intellectual automata 
that memorize and think quicker 
than the human brain? There is at 
present no answer to this question, 
and not because it lies in the distant 
future—it is not improbable that such 
machines will be our contemporaries. 
The point is, scientists at present 
have no clear picture of the future rela- 
tions of the creator and its marvel- 
lous creation. 


MODELLING 


The investigation 

of various phenomena 

and processes 

with the aid of models. 

The model is a symbolic image 
(a drawing, a diagram, 

a description, etc.). 


Different Is Identical 


In 1870 the British Admiralty laun- 
ched a new battleship the Captain. 
The ship went out to sea and overtur- 
ned. The ship sank—523 seamen pe- 
rished. 

Nobody could have expected it. 
Nobody with one exception. The ex- 
ception was the British scientist and 
ship builder W. Read who previously 
conducted experiments with a model 
of the ship and concluded that she 
would overturn even in mildly rough 
seas. But the Lords of the Admiralty 
refused to give any credit to the scien- 
tist who had been playing around 
with a “toy”. And irreparable loss 
was the result. 

It was not overnight that the mo- 
del—this priceless and doubtless aid 
of engineers and scientists—found ac- 
ceptance. See how little models were 
trusted not so long ago—only 100 
years back. In a well-known publica- 
tion—Granat’s dictionary—even in 
its seventh edition, the term model 
merited only two words: “See foun- 
dry.” 

When one speaks of models nowa- 
days, he least of all has in mind cast- 


ing models. Airplanes, machine tools, 
hydro-electric stations, cranes, ice- 
breakers, rockets, tractors, rolling 
mills—to enumerate everything that 
is made with the aid of modelling is 
a job in itself. 

Scientists have made this appa- 
rently childish hobby their business. 
Rigorous scientific definitions for mo- 
dels have been introduced. Some mo- 
dels are called material or physical. 
They imitate on a lesser scale the exis- 
ting “nature”: real constructions, in- 
struments, machines, etc. 

These are the models we have grown 
so accustomed to. They facilitate in 
many ways the work of designers, 
draftsmen and engineers of various 
specialities. 

A model of an airplane being de- 
signed—an exact small-scale copy of 
it—is placed into the wind tunnel to 
measure with the aid of this “toy” 
such most important parameters as 
aerodynamic drag of the plane, lift- 
ing force, thrust, weight, etc. 

Wind-tunnel tests yield altogether 
some 250 thousand numerical charac- 
teristics. All of them are of the ut- 
most importance for the design of a 
new plane. 

Another example of a model repro- 
ducing the physics of the process was 
cited by one of the authors of this 
trend in modelling, Lenin prize win- 
ner, Doctor of Technical Sciences 
V. Venikov. 

“It was in the year 1953 that the 
construction of a gigantic hydro-elec- 
tric station now bearing the name of 
Lenin was begun on the river Volga 
near the Zhiguli mountains. 

“Power from the station was main- 
ly to be transported to Moscow over 
an electric power-line about one thou- 


CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


A material or Fala model is a smal]- 
size analogue of the real object. 


sand kilometres long. Scientists and 
engineers faced many problems: that 
of controlling power output and trans- 
port, of guaranteeing its quality, of 
protecting the equipment from fai- 
lures, etc. 

“Since it was the first time that 
such powerful hydro-electric genera- 
tors, connected to long-distance ultra- 
high voltage lines, were produced, it 
was necessary to design for them ba- 
sically new control and protection de- 
vices, among them generator excita- 
tion regulators. 

“In 1954 five prototypes of such 
regulators were produced. But where 
were they to be tested? How was the 
optimum prototype to be selected? 

“Extensive tests entail reproducing 
extreme, i.e. breakdown, conditions, 
and a breakdown of a power system 
means idle tools, cold furnaces, dark 
windows of living houses. To avert 
breakdowns protective devices and 
automatic regulators are needed in- 


cluding those which were to be tes- 
ted just under breakdown ccnditions. 

“There was only one solution—to 
construct an artificial power system 
in which all processes of interest to 
power engineers would follow a course 
identical to that in the future power 
system. Such a power system, rather 
a miniature model of it, was construc- 
ted at the Moscow Power Institute.” 

The difficult thing is to get started. 
And hydro-pewer engineers from Mus- 
cow made the first step. After that 
all large hydro-electric systems of 
such plants as the Volga plant, the 
Bratsk plant, the Assuan plant were 
studied with the aid of physical mo- 
dels. 

Today the extreme importance of 
physical models as an experimental 
tool in technology does not need pro- 
ving. Everyone knows it. But there 
exists another world of models of 
quite different qualities and charac- 
ter—the world of mathematical mo- 
dels. They take the form quite unex- 
pected for models—that of mathema- 
tical formulae. 

For instance: 

a,7, + bt, = cy 
zt + byX_ = Ce 

What’s the hidden meaning of these 
bare signs? 

Let us ask the person who should 
know—the mathematician. Alas, the 
mathematician’s answer will be cou- 
ched only in the most general terms: 
“This is a system of two linear alge- 
braic equations with two unknowns. 
But what its precise meaning is, I 
cannot tell.” 

Let’s ask engineers of various spe- 
cialities. Their answers will not coin- 
cide. “This is,” the electrician will 
say, “an equation for voltages or cur- 


MODELLING 207 


A model for the reproduction of the physical processes—an artificial power system. 


rents in a circuit with active volta- 
ges.” 

The specialist in mechanics is cer- 
tain that the equations describe the 
equilibrium of forces in a system of 
levers or springs. 

The building engineer will inform 
us that these are equations relating 


forces and deformations in some struc- 
ture. 

The specialist in planning will sta- 
te quite authoritatively that these 
equations serve to calculate the work- 
ing time of machine tools. 

Five quite different answers. Which 
is the right one? You shouldn’t won- 


208 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


- 
a) 
© 
= 
a 
e 
® 
© 
5 
i= 
= 
&amp; 
= 


The model can assume a somewhat unfamiliar form as well—the form of mathematical for- 


mulae. 


der—all are right. Yes, a single sys- 
tem of linear algebraic equations can 
describe the state of equilibrium in 
an electric circuit, as well as in a 
system of levers, or in a structure. All 
depends on the meaning of the cons- 
tant coefficients a, b, c and of the 
symbols .of the unknowns z, and 2. 

It is appropriate at this juncture to 
recollect the words of the famous 
Russian academician A. Krylov: 
“To think of it, what could be in 


common between the calculation of 
motion of celestial bodies and the roll 
of a ship. Yet, if only the formula 
and the equations without words are 
written, it is impossible to discern 
which of the two problems is being 
solved: the equations are the same in 
both cases.” 

The wonderful mathematical si- 
milarity of diverse phenomena pre- 
sents tremendous opportunities. 
What’s the use of a scrupulously 


exact material model of a bridge 
assembled from exactly the same ma- 
terials and parts as the prototype? 
There is a simpler solution—the mo- 
del of the bridge may be constructed 
in the form of an electric circuit. 
This circuit serves as a peculiar mo- 
delling balance. Electricity proved to 
be the most useful “balance” for 
“weighing” mathematical models. Mo- 
dern electric equipment combines the 
qualities of great simplicity and re- 
liability with those of accuracy and 
sensitivity. This enabled electric mo- 
dels of mechanical, thermal, acousti- 
cal and other phenomena, continuous- 
ly varying with time, to be devised. 

Electric models comprise capaci- 
tors, resistors and inductances. For 
instance, it is possible to assemble a 
circuit with currents proportional to 
stresses in the structure of a bridge 
and to measure voltages across the 
junctions of the circuit which are pro- 
portional to deformations of the gir- 
ders. In this case the equations, in 
which those deformations play the 
part of unknowns, may be dispensed 
with. 

And what if the need arises to calcu- 
late a new variant? One has only to 
change the value of the resistors and 
repeat the measurements to get the 
data. This method enables numerous 
versions of structures to be tested with- 
in tens of minutes. 

Electric models are built, for ins- 
tance, for the solution of problems 
relating to the flight of an airplane. 


MODELLING 209 


An electric circuit model of a bridge truss. 


It takes seven months for ten cal- 
culators to calculate ten versions of 
the problem. With the aid of the 
electric modelling apparatus ten peop- 
le can calculate a thousand versions 
of the same problem in only four days. 


Let us now find out how the electric modelling apparatus, this “mathematical 


mirror” reflecting the regularities of the model, works. 

Let’s start with a simple example. We intend to study the stresses in a steel 
bridge truss loaded by a crane. What do we start with? First of all let’s find the 
geometric image of the truss and its electric model. 


14—616 


210 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


This is done with the aid of unfamiliar “electric cubes” which specialists call 
resistor boxes. These “cubes” can be arranged to outline all sorts of figures: the 
body of a dam, the wall of a channel, the blade of a turbine, the wing of a plane, 
a rail, etc. 

Each of these “electric cubes” consists of several coils of wire and condensors, 
connected to a single terminal. The required circuit is drawn along the terminals 
inside the “cube”—the so-called junctions. They are connected to current sources, 
and this initiates various phenomena in the “cubes”. Electricity acting on each 
“cube” through its junction plays the part of water, heat source or mechanical 
force—i.e. of the active environment of the real prototype being studied. 

But how should these “cubes” be assembled into figures corresponding to dams, 
parts of turbines, etc.? These structures or machine parts should, too, be subdi- 
vided into “cubes”, so that a definite number of the “cubes” would correspond 
to a definite dimension of the object being studied. This can be done easily with 
the aid of the object’s prints. 

Let’s return now to the calculations of the truss. Using the drawing of the truss 
we arrange the “electric cubes” to form a geometric likeness of it and make the 
measurements. There is no need of complicated switching and connecting of the 
ends of one “cube” with those of another. The mass of “electric cubes” is so arran- 
ged that any figure can be immediately “cut out” by simply outlining the object 
with a string on the “electric cube” set. 

A universal electric model possesses the additional faculty of probing deep into 
the element. Is there any way to learn what happens 10 cm inside the truss? Let’s 
make a “hole” in the electric model. We can make any “holes” we like, marking 
them appropriately on the print. After that we have only to disconnect a certain 
number of “cubes” in the corresponding place of the model. After the required 
hole has been made, any measurements may be made inside it, and they will give 
exact answers as to what takes place inside the beam. To probe to any depth into 
the “wound” inflicted on the model, one has only to connect a wire to this place. 
This is done automatically by pressing an appropriate button on the “electric 
cube” set. 

The stresses in the beam are studied on an electric model called the electro-in- 
tegrator. It solves—integrates—with the aid of electricity complicated differen- 
tial equations sensitive to the smallest changes taking place in the shortest inter- 
vals of time. 

The integrator is one of the existing types of continuous-action electric model- 
ling machines. Another name for them is analogue computers. Literally day to 
day their family is being expanded and modernized. 

You have not failed to notice that the principle of operation of the analogue 
computers is quite different from that of the digital computer. One specialized 
book on modelling contains a very vivid and clear example to this effect. 

A tailor who measures a man’s figure in certain places makes‘use of numerical 
methods. 

The shoe-maker, on the other hand, who outlines the shape of a man’s foot 
on paper, makes use of the analogue principle, since his measurements are 
continuous. This, too, is the principle of operation of the analogue computer: 


MODELLING 21! 


V 


R 
I 


Yer 


The analogy existing between thermal and electric processes enables the distribution of heat in 
bodies even of the most complex shape to be modelled. 


continuous changes in numerical values are correlated with continuous changes 
in the value of the physical analogue. 

For some research studies electric modelling sets play the part of the marvellous 
cure-all. 

Let’s again take the airplane studied in a wind tunnel. As a result of studies 
scientists arrive at the so-called flight equation of the airplane. To solve this equa- 
tion means to predetermine the flight path of the plane. Despite numerous pa- 
rameters its solution would present few difficulties if the forces acting on the pla- 
ne in flight would remain constant. 

But this is totally out of the question—the plane is subjected to alternate down- 
ward and upward air streams, it is thrown about from side to side like a ship on 


14* 


212 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


the waves. The forces acting on the plane change continuously, too. These changes 
take place every moment of time, and they are not repeated. 

On an electric-modelling or an electronic set fast processes can be repeated 
any number of times. The mathematical model helps man to achieve mastery over 
time. With the aid of “electric cubes” it enables dynamic variable processes ta- 
king place in reality to be slowed down or accelerated. 

The scientist has only to reduce the modelling rate to place himself in the po- 
sition of a man watching a slow motion picture—he is able to learn things he 
would not be able to without the artificial slowing down. 

By increasing the modelling rate it is possible to hasten a process which in rea- 
lity proceeds at a snail’s pace and takes years to complete. 

Looking into the “mathematical mirror” one sees and quite quickly, too, what 
is going to happen to a dam, a lock, an artificial lake several years after they have 


been built. 


This is the reason why the unquestionable advantages of mathematical model- 
ling are adopted without reservation by scientists of various specialities. 


Physicists occasionally find for the 
models quite fantastic, from the lay- 
man’s point of view, fields of applica- 
tion. Just to cite physico-mathemati- 
cal models of the plasma—of the ob- 
ject the direct study of which, as 
physicists themselves agree, is made 
very difficult by its peculiar nature 
and by the complexity and great cost 
of experimental installations. 

A veritable hamlet in space enve- 
lops the earth—75 space stations. This 
is the place of destination of rockets 
fired from the Earth. Regular traffic 
by spaceships is maintained between 
the stations. They bring in foodstuffs, 
equipment and instruments, specia- 
lists for servicing and repair work. 
These results of studies carried out by 
American scientists using the method 
of mathematical modelling were ex- 
pressed in concise formulae. That’s 
modelling as applied to astronautics. 

And what about chemistry? Here the 
usual practice is for a process after 
leaving the laboratory to be subjected 
to a protracted, multistage and ar- 
duous testing and development work. 


The journey from the test tube to an 
industrial installation often takes from 
ten to twelve years. Can mathemati- 
cal modelling be applied here? Yes, 
and it is already being applied. For 
instance, at the Novosibirsk chemical 
plant factory tests have been com- 
pleted of an installation which man- 
aged to “skip” all intermediate deve- 
lopment stages and arrived at the 
factory direct from the laboratory. 
The “mathematical mirror” disclosed 
its true image. Mathematical models 
are also used to study the properties 
of new catalysts, as well as in some 
other chemical experiments. 

In collaboration with biologists, 
chemists achieve promising results in 
modelling such exacting and unwieldy 
substances as enzymes, these marvel- 
lous catalysts of life. 

You can learn about models in 
biology and medicine from a chapter 
of this book called “Cybernetics in 
Biology”. 

Something remains to be said about 
one more aspect of modelling, about 
its role in experiment. The modelling 


experiment differs from the usual one 
in that the experimenter experiments 
not with the object itself but with a 
model of it. The model “intrudes” 
into the experiment and draws at- 
tention to itself. This is a very im- 
portant property of modelling, for 
models can be experimented with 
even when the objects themselves for 
some reason or other are beyond the 
experimenters’ control—as the case 
may be, they may be too far away 
(the stars), or very short-lived (ele- 
mentary particles), or too great (lar- 
ge industrial complexes). In these 
cases the model acting as an interme- 
diary in assuming the role of the 


MODELLING 213 


object widens the scope of the experi- 
ment rendering thereby invaluable 
service to the experimenter. 

The story about where and when 
analogies between different processes 
and properties with an identical “ma- 
thematical image” are used can be 
continued indefinitely. Or it can be 
cut short with the words that have 
been born several hundred years ago. 

“And, above all, I value the Ana- 
logies, my faithful instructors. They 
are in possession of all the secrets 
of Nature and should therefore be 
last to be ignored.” 

These are the words of the great 
German mathematician J. Kepler. 


24 MUSIC, ELECTRONIC 


A musical piece 

produced j 

by an electronic computer 
according to a programme 
describing the requirements 
for the work. 


A Deaf Composer 


We shall begin our acquaintance 
with “electronic composers” with a 
list of some of their most celebrated 
works. 

These include the “Illiac Suite” 
for strings written by a computer at 
the University of Illinois, USA, 
and four thousand songs under the 
general heading “Bert’s Button” pro- 
duced by a computer belonging to the 
Dadatron Company of California. At 
Harvard University a computer is 
also a capable popular song composer. 
True, its operators have not assigned 
names to its compositions. Perhaps 
they were discouraged by the ma- 
chine’s strange habit of suddenly swit- 
ching from one song to another for 
no apparent reason. In our country 
a “Ural” computer working in a 
different style has produced a series 
of musical pieces under the general 
heading “Urals Melodies”. 

Yes, electronic computers write mu- 
sic. How do they do it? Do they un- 
derstand anything of the complex 
laws of composition? Can they be 
musically talented? 

These are natural questions. Let 


us try and answer them. First, the 
latter question: musical talent. 

It would seem that music can be 
written by non-musical methods. So 
talent is not all that is necessary... . 


Two centuries ago, in 1751, an Eng- 
lish musician, William Hays, wrote 
a humorous work called The Ari of 
Writing Music Employing an Excep- 
tionally New Method Suitable for the 
Poorest Talents. All that is needed, 
according to the instructions, is a 
stiff brush and some ink. You dip 
the brush in the ink, then drawing a 
finger over the bristles you spatter 
a sheet of music paper with ink spots. 
Then all that remains is to add the 
bars, note stems and other musical 
symbols to complete the work. 

A few years later, in 1757, a Ger- 
man, Kirnberger by name, compiled a 
Guide for Composing Polonaises and 
Minuets with the Aid of Dice. 


Unlike the former, this was a seri- 
ous work. Before writing his compo- 
sition the composer has to draw up 
a table of six columns, numbered one 
to six for the faces of the die, and 
eight rows, corresponding to the num- 
ber of bars in the musical phrase. 
The next step is to compose 48 bars, 
one for each square in the table. Fi- 
nally, the author has to cast the die. 
Say, it gives a “4”, then the composer 
takes the first bar of his piece from 
the first row of the fourth column. 
Thus, by casting again and again, 
the first phrase of eight bars is com- 
pleted. 

In 1793, no less a composer than 
Mozart wrote a Guide to the Composi- 
tion of Waltzes with the Aid of Two 
Dice Without Any Knowledge of Mu- 
sic or Composing. It also provided for 


MUSIC, ELECTRONIC 215 


A waltz written by Mozart with the aid of dice. 


displaying 
, and could 


Then, after 6000 “dice throws” 


it produced 600 new tunes. True, it 
did not hesitate to take whole passages 
from one or several tunes, 
Paradoxically, it was Hays’ me- 
thod of spattering ink spots with a 


a propensity for plagiarism 
hardly be called a “creative” machine. 


computer was used to analyse 37 tu- 


nes. 


techniques, 


learning these 
one is naturally tempted to ask why 


a machine couldn’t “throw dice” and 


randomly selected by throwing a pair 
select random notes from a table. It 


of dice. 
On 
certainly can, and much faster than 


a numbered table with notes to be 
a human being. In one experiment a 


216 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


brush that proved most suitable for 
computer music, though with one im- 
portant improvement: the erasal of 
unwanted blot-notes. 

To operate on this principle, a 
machine’s memory must be provided 
with a store of sounds from which it 
can extract combinations according 
to mathematical rules. As you may 
- have guessed, the “sounds” in the 
machine are represented in terms of 
numbers. And, of course, a carefully 
compiled programme is needed. 

But what is to be gained by this? 
Who needs this kind of primitive mu- 
sical compilations? The answer is no 
one—at least no one needs them as 
music. However, they have proved 


to be the source serious and very 
promising work. 

An example of such work is the 
“Urals Melodies” mentioned before. 
They are interesting as an attempt to 
construct not only chords, as is usual- 
ly the case, but also that very impor- 
tant component of music, the melody. 
The author of the new method is 
Soviet scientist R. Zaripov. The essen- 
ce of his method is contained in a pa- 
per entitled “On Algorithmic Descrip- 
tion of the Process of Music Composi- 
tion” printed in such a serious and 
highly esteemed publication as the 
Proceedings of the Academy of Scien- 
ces of the USSR. 


R. Zaripov, mathematician and musician, had first to adjust himself to his 


electronic “co-author”— “Ural” computer—since a machine can solve only those 
problems which have been described mathematically, for which there is an algo- 
rithm and a firm guide for action. 

Thus, it is first necessary to compile the laws, principles and rules of musical 
composition in terms of mathematical formulae and logical relationships. Is this 
possible? Certainly. 

Men noted long ago that music follows certain mathematical laws. Cassiodorus 
wrote in the 6th century: “Music is a science that considers numbers with respect 
to phenomena observable in sounds.” 

It is said that Pythagoras, once, on passing by a smithy, noticed that the ham- 
mers striking the anvil produced sounds with intervals corresponding to a quart, 
a quint and an octave. He walked into the smithy and asked the blacksmith to 
show him the hammers. He weighed them and found that the hammers that pro- 
duced the octave, the quint and the quart weighed respectively a half, two-thirds 
and three-quarters of the weight of the heaviest hammer. 

The relationship discovered by Pythagoras subsequently became the basis of 
the theory of music. 

The simplest harmonious combinations of tones—chords—were studied long 
ago. It was found that the greater the simple fraction expressing the ratio of the 
sounds’ frequencies (which correspond to the pitch of each sound of the chord), 
the “purer” the chord is and more pleasing it is to the ear. 

Thus, a high C is produced by double the frequency of a low C, the ratio of the 
octave being i. The ratio Es yields a fifth (C-G), the ratio 2 a fourth (C-F). 


It is known that piano scales are associated with rational and irrational nume- 
bers, and that there are logarithms in music. 


MUSIC, ELECTRONIC 217 


000037 
000006 
000210 
202413 
003212 
004111 
004113 
205115 
005113 
006250 
007006 
010210 
212413 
013212 
014111 

014113 
215115 
015113 
016250 
017006 
022207 


- Nw fu vWN O DO 


0) 


Several processes in the translation of notes and rules of music into machine language: a method 
of encoding pitches; a portion of a programme written down in number,code; the same program- 
me on punched tapes; the result of the machine’s work written down on paper tape. 


Mathematicians studying music found that popular songs are drawn from 35 to 
60 notes. A statistical analysis of large numbers of songs revealed the following 
typical song structure: there is the first part, which we shall call A, covering eight 
bars and consisting of 18 to 25 notes. This part is repeated once and then followed 
by a part B, also covering eight bars but consisting of 17-35 notes, after which 
part A is repeated once more. 

Other interesting rules were discovered. If five consecutive notes follow on an 
ascending scale, the sixth will always drop, and vice versa. Also, the first note 
of part A will usually never be the second, fourth or fifth minor note of a scale. 
Songs obey such long-established rules of composition as Mozart’s rule which lays 
down‘that an interval between two neighbouring notes must never exceed six to- 
nes. 


218 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Commence work ——— 
——— EEE a ll 
tt a 

Wh “BOC lil 
81890 
WIT qit88.4 
a 
Mt 78S WY 
me zs ll 


Choose pitch | 
TT 1756 WW 

HIT | as67890%%,  |{T 

TT] 23apeze9o1s. 

Does pitch agree with : (2345678901234 J 
Seale? TTP '23456 78901234 

{|P 234567890123" || 
234567890123 ITT 

456789012" 


ih ieee Ht 
li Ul 


an dda ego lsat HT 


No 4 
INT sisescesall 
No 


i 
cond phrase \Vag =| 
By === 


End operation be 


Schematic diagram of the steps in the production of machine music. 


You may, on occasion, have listened to an unfamiliar tune and been able to pre- 
dict the following note before it was played. This happens most frequently with 
lyrical songs. Specialists say that, in such cases, each subsequent note carries less 
information than, for instance, in music pieces by Prokofiev or Shostakovich which 
abound in unexpected inflections. Thus, the amount of information per note is 
a parameter, a quantity which can be used to judge the music. 

The rules of composition deducted from analyses of musical works are used in 
writing music with the help of electronic computers. In addition, the “Ural” 
computer was provided with a special generator of random numbers, its purpose 
being to present random notes in a digital code. Each note was then examined 
under the rules of musical composition, and only when a note was found to meet 
the requirements was it entered into the score. If the screening reveals the note 


MUSIC, ELECTRONIC 219 


to be unsuitable it is rejected, and another candidate is investigated. This conti- 
nues until the tune is completed. 

It would seem from this description that computer music writing is not all 
that difficult, but it was quite some time before Zaripov finally worked out the 
programme for the “Ural” computer. His task was to provide a mathematical 
description of music for the machine and develop a system of codification for no- 
tes and other elements of music. 

For writing the marches and waltzes that were later incorporated in the “Urals 
Melodies” Zaripov represented every note as a five-digit number. The first two 
digits denoted the ordinal number of the sound, the third indicated the length of 
the sound, the fourth and fifth, its pitch. The machine was not allowed to include 
more than five consecutive ascending or descending notes (remember the rules 
of composition), nor could it select adjacent pairs of notes of more than an octave 
difference. There were many other taboos besides. 

Even so it occasionally got out of hand. Zaripov recalls that after he had taught 
the machine to write waltzes he decided to go over to marches. But the computer 
balked, refusing to write anything but waltzes, and then finally began to rewind 
the programme tape over and over again without producing any scores at all. 
It was only after a thorough recheck that Zaripov discovered that in one of the 
lines of the programme he had mistakenly recorded the number 1177 instead of 
1777. 

A considerable part of the machine’s music-writing programme was devoted to 
a description of rhythmic patterns or meters. In this case two meters were re- 
quired: four-quarts for marches and three-quarts for waltzes. The programme also 
provided for the number of parts in the future compositions and the number of 
bars in each part. A 

The programme, which incorporated more than two thousand instructions, 


? 


utilized the total capacity of the “Ural’s” working “memory”. Each individual 


Adagio ma mon troppo lento 


220 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


- 


Tune No 


Tune No. 2 


note required an average of 800 machine operations, and a whole piece as many 


as 30000. 


A melody synthesis programme for a “BOCM-2” computer occupies several 


thousands of its “memory” cells. 


When the computer, equipped with its programme, finishes its compilation of 
the tune its automatic printer feeds it out in code on paper tape. The record is de- 


ciphered and then transcripted into conventional musical script. 


MUSIC, ELECTRONIC 221 


Let us now have a look at some 
examples of electronic musical com- 
position. 

On p. 219, is a fragment from 
the second part of the “Illiac Suite”. 

On p. 220, top, are fragments from two 
tunes written by the Soviet “BO9CM-2” 
computer with the help of the Lat- 
vian mathematician Vilnis Detlovs. 


The melody onp. 220, bottom, repre- 
sents a sequence of 32 bars selected 
by American scientists Olson and 
Belar from 44 bars produced by a 
computer. 

This is one of the first tunes produced 
by the “Ural” computer (before the 
“Urals Melodies”) on top of this page. 

And below is a passage from the 
“Urals Melodies”. 


222 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Now that you have seen how com- 
puters compose music and have exa- 
mined several pieces, it is time to 
explain why scientists devote so much 
time and effort to produce what is 
usually extremely simple melodies. 

The thing is that computers deal 
with symbols. The elements of music 
are also symbols. The number of sym- 
bols in music is relatively small, 
which makes it convenient for compu- 
ter experiments. A computer makes 
it possible to trace step by step, note 
by note how simple elements combine 
to produce a tune. Computer music 
offers an opportunity to study the 
very nature of music, investigating 
musical forms, chords, scales and se- 
quences. A computer is a fine tool for 
analysing the creative process. 

By teaching computers to write mu- 
sic scholars hope to penetrate the do- 
main of art and investigate it through 
a new, cybernetic approach. 

Hence the very specific role assig- 
ned to computers composing music: 
they are not intended for creative 
work but as man’s helpers. A compu- 
ter can, for example, easily cope with 


the rather laborious task of transcri- 
bing a score from one key to another, 
and it is sure to make no mistakes in 
the process. 

A computer can be usefully em- 
ployed in deciphering musical manus- 
cripts employing the methods of quan- 
titative analysis. In a similar way it 
may transcribe voluminous tape re- 
cordings of musical folklore. 

“Electronic musicians” can be en- 
trusted with such tasks as searching 
for new timbers, the importance of 
which can hardly be overestimated for 
instrumentation, as well as in the 
arrangement of symphonic music for 
individual instruments. 

It is hard to say whether machines 
will ever be capable of producing 
anything like genuine works of art, 
and works of creative value. Obvi- 
ously, a machine producing something 
like a work of art has no creative 
urge: it all begins and ends with the 
first and last bar assigned by the prog- 
ramme. A machine may grind out hun- 
dreds and thousands of tunes, but it 
will never say with pride, “This is 
my best work!” 


An Advanced Programme 


N 


NUMBERS IN A COMPUTER 


The recording of numbers 

and instructions 

in a computer— 

in its recording block 

or in the arithmetical block— 
with the aid of notation scales. 


Two States 


Everything made of 0 and 1—only 
two symbols, quite convenient, isn’it? 
Let’s try and find ways of recording 
them mechanically, electrically or 
electronically. 


Let’s start with the simplest. 
You’ve probably seen asimple village 
gate lock—a chunk of wood with a 
nail in the centre. This device can 
keep the gate either closed or open, 
there being no intermediate position. 

And what’s the electrical analo- 
gue of such a rotating lock? A simple 
push-button table-lamp switch—press 
the button to turn the light on, press 
the button to turn the light off. The 
switch remains in one position until 
we switch it into another. After it is 
switched into one position it will 
remain in it as long as necessary, pro- 
viding for the memorization of this 
position. 

The symbols 0 and 1 of the binary 
system can be transmitted and recor- 
ded with the aid of electric current, 
for example, by changing the time 
intervals of current in the circuit: a 
short interval—a dot, a longer one—a 
dash, as in the Morse code. Or by 
changing the polarity of the current: 
plus-minus. Or by changing the am- 
plitude: one in the presence of a 
signal, zero in its absence. The last 
method is used in computers because 
it’s reliable, and because the compu- 
ter’s devices easily distinguish the 
presence of the signal from its absence. 

The main part of the high-speed 
computer is the so-called trigger. It, 
too, works on the “on-off” principle. 

In a simplified form, the trigger 


224 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The trigger circuit. When the right tube is open and the left closed, the trigger registers 0. And 
vice versa, when the left is open and the right is closed, it registers 1. 


consists of two electron tubes assem- 
bled in one bulb. They are electrically 
connected so that when one conducts 
current, the other blocks it. (One is 
open, the other is closed.) One of 
these stable states was taken to mean 
4, the other 0. 

Each new electric pulse applied to 
the input of the trigger simultaneous- 


The recording of numbers in a computer by the series and the parallel methods. p&gt; 


ly closes the open tube and opens the 
closed one. And in strict accordance 
with this pulse the trigger immedia- 
tely changes its state from 1 to 0 
and vice versa. 

It remains in each state until a 
new pulse reaches it. So “overturning” 
from one state into the other the trig- 
ger enables pulses to be registered. 


O"@HO@HO'OH@O’OH 

Val V@ dav HOve qi 
{O"EHO'OH@’CHO'OF¢ 
, 


226 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The switching time of a mechanical 
device is usually 0.5 s, that of an 
electrical device—a switch—is 0.035 s. 
Due to the properties of the electron 
tubes the trigger “reverses” unbelie- 
vably fast—in 0.000001 s. This is the 
clue to one of the secrets of fast cal- 


culations by the electronic compu- 
ter. 

But then a justifiable question ari- 
ses: if a trigger registers only 1 and 0 
how are we to record all other num- 
bers? To make the triggers calculate 
they are connected into circuits. 


Here we have four triggers connected into a circuit. 


Each of them has two input and two output contacts. Before work has begun 
the triggers record “zero”, that is the counter circuit registers 0000. 

Now suppose that an electrical signal—a pulse—is applied to the input contacts 
of the first trigger from the right. The trigger will “reverse” and register 1, 
the rest remaining in the 0 state. Hence, the circuit will register 0001. 

Let’s transmit another pulse. The first trigger will switch off and will return 
to 0 and transmit a pulse to the second. The latter will register 1. The circuit will 
register 0010. 

Such a system of triggers may be compared to the abacus having only two 
beads to a string. When all beads on the string have been moved from right to left, 
one should move one bead on the next string returning the former to the initial 
position. What’s done by fingers on the abacus, is done by electrical pulses in the 
trigger counters. 

There are in existence two methods of recording numbers: parallel and series. 
The series method has been described above. By this method all the pulses travel 
along one channel following each other in time. This method can be visualized 
as a troop column with soldiers marching one behind the other. 

In the series method one has to watch only one channel which carries the pulses. 
But then you have to wait for the pulses to pass one after another as on the cross- 
roads you wait for the transport to pass. 

The parallel method entails pulses appearing simultaneously but in different 
conductors. The parallel motion may be compared to troops marching in a row 
shoulder to shoulder. Acting by this method, to determine the combination of 
pulses it is necessary to observe all channels, to know what happens in each of 
the conductors. 

Numbers in the computer are recorded in electronic circuits. The other name for 
them is registers. Usually one number is recorded in one register. 

Here is a number recorded in a register. You see in the figure (p. 225) the orders 
of the numbers in the binary system as depicted by the pulses. 


It would appear at first sight that 
to record large numbers one should 
have an enormous amount of trigger 
cells. At this juncture it is appro- 
priate to recall the Indian legend of 
the Shah Sheram who offered the sage 


Seta to name a prize he would like 
to receive for his invention of an 
excellent game—the chess. 

Seta laid the chess board before the 
Shah and asked for one wheat grain for 
the first square, two for the second, 


four for the third and so on, for all 
the 64 squares—that is, for each next 
square twice as many as for the pre- 
ceding one. 

The demand of the sage appeared 
quite modest at first. Still, Seta fai- 
led to get his prize. 

The mathematicians of the Shah 
calculated that the number of grains 
for the last square is so great that it 
defies imagination: eighteen quintil- 
lion four hundred forty-six quadril- 
lion seven hundred and forty-four tril- 
lion seventy three billion seven hun- 
dred and nine million five hundred 
and fifty-one thousand six hundred 
and twelve. 

The grain would have filled two 
barns stretching from the Earth to 


NUMBERS IN A COMPUTER 227 


the Sun. And this gigantic number 
the inventor managed to get with 
the aid of only 64 squares. 

In the modern computer, too, the 
circuit of only 64 triggers is capable 
of counting the astronomical “chess” 
number 2°, 

Triggers have been in use as count- 
ing devices for a long time. Formerly 
they were used mainly to count ato- 
mic particles. Later their use was 
extended to computers. 

In the Soviet Union the first trig- 
ger was made in 1918 by the promi- 
nent scientist, radio engineer 
M. Bonch-Bruevich. He started re- 
search on electron tubes way back 
in 1916 and was the first to organize 
the production of them. 


O 


OPTIMAL CONTROL 


Application 

uf mathematical methods 
and of electronic computers 
to evolve optimum 

(best possible) decisions 
for production control. 


Look Before You Leap 


First, a problem. A factory that 
manufactures certain parts in serial 
lots receives orders for its wares se- 
veral months in advance of delivery. 
It can manufacture the goods just 
prior to delivery; it can produce them 
earlier and keep them in the ware- 
house if this for some reason seems 
more convenient. But storage costs 
money. The question is how best to 
organize the manufacture and storage 
of the goods to reduce costs and over- 
head to the minimum. 

Obviously, this is not a problem 
to be solved by rule of thumb. 

Or take another problem: how to 
distribute workpieces among machi- 
ne tools. Thisis not an easy one either. 
Thus, in distributing three work- 
pieces among three machine tools there 
are 108 distribution variants. For 
four workpieces distributed among 
four tools the number of variants is 
already 8272. 


These examples are cited not with- 
out reason: every day economists, 
planners, traffic controllers must 
solve similar problems to find the op- 
timum variant for every given case. 


Here an economist is confronted 
with a common, everyday problem: 
how to distribute orders for textile 
production among the mills most rati- 
onally. He must plan the utilization 
of the mills’ capacities in such a way 
as to ensure the maximum output at the 
lowest cost; in other words, he must 
draw up an optimum plan. 

Such a plan must answer the fol- 
lowing questions: 


Required daily supply of sand, tons 


What fabrics in what quantities 
and on what looms should be produced 
in each mill? 

How many types of fabrics can 
all the mills manufacture? How will 
the quotas be met? Will they be 
surpassed or will output fall short? 

What is the cost of the fabrics ma- 
nufactured at each mill and averaged 
among all of them? 

What looms are needed to fulfil the 
assignment? 

Will new looms have to be installed? 

It would take a long time to solve 
the problem even if we were to dis- 
tribute three types of cloth among 
three mills (remember the example 
with workpieces and machine tools: 
108 variants). However, let us try 
and solve a problem of a similar type 
to see what planners must deal with. 


OPTIMAL CONTROL 229 


Sand is delivered by barges to three landing stages. Let us denote the landing 


stages I, II and III. The sand is needed for four construction projects, A, B, C, D. 

To solve this problem we will have to write several tables. In the first one the 
right-hand column gives the daily requirement of sand—30 tons. The bottom row 
indicates the cargo-handling capacity of each landing stage. The delivery quotas 


230 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


are balanced with the requirements. The numbers in the squares show the dis- 
tance, in kilometres, between the landing stages and the construction sites. 

Our problem is to distribute sand deliveries among the landing stages so as to 
keep the autohaulage, in ton-kilometres, down to the least possible minimum. 

The garage traffic controller has distributed deliveries as shown in the second 
table (the numbers in the squares indicate the amount of sand delivered from the 
respective landing stages to the respective construction sites). All construction 
sites receive the necessary quantity of sand. But what about haulage figures? This 
is easily calculated: 1x1+724+3x*448x5+5x7+6x8=150 ton-kilometres. 

However, a better distribution is given in the third table. The number of ton- 
kilometres is reduced by one-half: 8x1+41*249x444*5+44x717x3=100. 

But the best, optimum variant offers a 70 per cent cut of haulage as compared 
with the first. It is presented in the fourth table. 

You see how much trouble is involved in the solution of a “simple” economic 
problem, a concrete problem with few variants and small numbers involved. 

Today it is realized by all that it is hard to work out even a family budget for 
a month or two in advance to an accuracy of one rouble. The economic estimates 
for an industrial enterprise are a hundredfold more difficult. And what about cal- 
culations for a group of enterprises, a whole industry, or on a nation-wide scale? 

After this try and imagine the tremendous scale of economic calculations for a 
national economy of the size we have in the Soviet Union! 

See what savings have resulted from producing an optimum plan for a single 
industry on a country-wide scale. The optimum plan for the geographical distri- 
bution of cement mills throughout our country enabled a reduction of average 
haulage distance from 565 to 305 kilometres. This yielded a saving of 140 million 
roubles per year. Furthermore, it made possible the cancellation of construction 
plans of several mills in unsuitable locations. This yielded a saving of another 
192 million roubles. 

Such economic problems are solved by means of so-called linear programming, 
which was elaborated by Soviet scientist L. Kantorovich. 


We shall try to explain the general 


The natural question is:Jwhat diet 
idea of linear programming with the 


can fully meet the organism’s physio- 


help of a simple example. 

To function normally, the human 
body must receive a certain daily 
ration of nutrients: fats, proteins, car- 
bohydrates, vitamins, mineral salts, 
etc. On the basis of comprehensive 
research, medical science has estab- 
lished the necessary ration for 45 
types of nutrients. The substances 
needed by the body are contained in 
various quantities in different foods: 
bread, milk, fish, vegetables, fruit, 
cereals—in all some 40 or 50 groups. 


logical requirements at the lowest 
cost? In other words, what is needed 
is the cheapest and at the same time 
medically the most wholesome food. 

Thus, the task is to choose from 
50 groups of food products a diet 
containing the 15 nutrients required 
by the organism. The basic criteria 
for an optimum selection is the cost 
of the food. It should be as low as 
possible. The task, in mathematical 
parlance, involves the solution of a 
set of 15 equations with 50 unknowns. 


Systems of simultaneous equations 
in which the number of unknowns 
exceeds the number of equations have 
an infinite number of solutions—and 
the task is to choose the one and only 
best one! 

For the purposes of our example we 
can restrict ourselves to a more mo- 
dest problem with only two foodstuffs 
—bread and milk—and two nutrients 
—proteins and calcium. 

Here is a table showing how much 
protein and calcium there is in a ki- 
logram of bread and a litre of milk: 


Bread, kg Milk, litre 
Protein, g 60 40 
Calcium, mg 250 1200 


The organism requires not less than 
100 grams of protein and 700 milli- 
grams of calcium a day. 

Now we must recall what we know 
about systems of algebraic equations. 

We denote the required quantity 
of bread by x,, and of milk, by 2; 
the coefficients a, and b, in the first 
equation denote the protein content 
of one kilogram of bread and one litre 
of milk; the coefficients a, and 
in the second equation denote the 
respective calcium content of bread 
and milk. 

We know that the more bread and 
milk in the diet the greater is its nu- 
trient content. Hence, we have a li- 
near dependence involving a system 
of linear equations, viz.: 


60z,-+ 40.100 
2502-12004 &gt;700 


The sign &gt; means “is equal to or 
greater than”. This is a very impor- 
tant point. If the quantity of protein 


OPTIMAL CONTROL 2314 


and calcium were rigidly defined (ex- 
actly 100 g and 700 mg, neither more 
nor less) everything would be clear. 

Two equations with two unknown 
quantities. Such a system of equations 
has only one solution, and the question 
of an optimum choice does not arise. 
The trick, however, is that, accord- 
ing to the conditions of the problem, 
the body may get more than 100 g of 
protein and 700 mg of calcium a day. 
This leaves extensive scope for choos- 
ing. The number of possible variants 
becomes infinite. 

Incidentally, this is easily demon- 
strated. The above expressions can 
easily be made into equalities. All we 
need is to introduce a new unknown 
quantity in each of them, that would 
make an equality out of the mecualtty 


60a,+ 402,—x3=100 
2502, -+12002,—2,=700 


Thus, we have a system of two equa- 
tions with four unknowns. It yields an 
infinite number of solutions, depend- 
ing on the value we assign to the va- 
riables z, and 24. 

It remains to be said that, quite 
naturally, out of the multitude of so- 
lutions we are interested in only those 
where z, and z, have positive values: 
bread and milk can’t be negative. 

Suppose a kilogram of bread costs 
21 kopecks and a litre of milk, 28 
kopecks. Hence, the price of a diet 
consisting of z, kilograms of bread 
and z, litres of milk is 

=217,+282, 

In linear programming this mathe- 
matical expression is known as the 
target function. It provides a precise 
quantitative characteristic of the goal 
we set ourselves in planning our ac- 
tions. The function determines the 
criterion we use to compare various 


-Warehou- 
ses 


Factories 


IN 
o— SS 


Warehouse IV 


Warehouse V 


1 [ia 
2} 7 [ra | | 


Warehou- 
ses 


Warehouse III 


IS, 
70 


Factories 


Warehouse 


IZ 
80 alL&lt; 


Pilot 
Gees 120 


Factory C 


ra, pL 
Al 


Volume of 
V | output of 
factories 


100 


pane ee ee 
7 [14 5] 12] 
Bi 


variants of the plan in the quest for 
the optimum one. 

In our problem a clearly defined 
target function ensures the choice of 
the optimum diet at the lowest cost. 
The solution yields such positive va- 
lues of the variables x, and z, which 
satisfy the conditions of the problem 
(as written down in the system of 
equations) and with which the target 
function has the minimum of all pos- 
sible values. The methods of linear 
programming are designed to solve 
just these kinds of problems. 

» A computer is fed the conditions 
of the problem in the form of a sys- 
tem of equations and inequalities and 
the target function formula. The ma- 
chine selects some initial variant and 
analyses it. The analysis immediately 
reveals whether this practically ran- 
dom variant approaches the optimum 
or not—something, obviously, high- 
ly improbable. If the variant is not 
the optimum one the analysis indica- 
tes how the next one should be chosen 
so that it is better than the preceding 
one and the target function is smaller. 

The new variant is also analysed for 
optimum conditions and, if the ans- 
wer is negative, another, still better, 
variant is selected. The quest pro- 
ceeds step by step until the analysis 
reveals that the optimum solution, that 
is, a variant with the smallest pos- 
sible target function has been found. 

As you see, the method is based not 
on a random try-out of all possible 


OPTIMAL CONTROL 233 


variants but on a purposeful quest 
each step of which brings us nearer 
to the goal. When it is achieved, and 
the computer feeds out the optimum 
variant we can declare with full con- 
fidence that, given the stated conditi- 
ons of the problem, nothing better 
can be devised—this is guaranteed by 
the methods of linear programming. 

With the current high rates of 
economic development the compo- 
nents of the national economy inter- 
act faster and faster, and economic 
indices become ever more dynamic. 
In such circumstances planning must 
be carried out on a continuous basis, 
and all sections of the economy must 
be managed with the utmost efficien- 
cy. The smallest delays in planning 
and control can result in losses of no 
less magnitude than those due to in- 
accuracies in planning. 

Until recently in our country more 
than two million persons were emplo- 
yed in administration and manage- 
ment. It may come as a surprise to 
the uninitiated that at the Gorky 
Motor Works alone a veritable army— 
more than five thousand people—are 
engaged in ensuring the factory’s raw 
materials supplies and marketing. 

The people responsible for economic 
management handle billions of pa- 
pers annually. Nowadays simple desk 
calculators and adding machines are 
inadequate to cope with the flood of 
information, it is virtually impossible 
to calculate any great number of 


Study of transport operations by linear programming. The purpose is to obtain the lowest haulage 
costs taking into account the output of each factory, the storage capacity of each warehouse 
and haulage costs of a unit commodity from each factory to each warehouse. The tables at upper 
left and right present two optimum solutions. The numbers in the squares denote the quanti- 
ties of different goods to be shipped to various warehouses to obtain the lowest overhead. The 
table at the bottom gives the cost of transporting cargo from factory to warehouse. The di 


ram in the centre presents the haulage routes wit 
arrows give the most advantageous routes. 


ag- 
the costs presented on the vans. The thick 


234 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


=) 


Approximate picture 
of actual 


situation 


tion to suit actual 


Schematic diagram of production control. 


plan variants and ensure optimal con- 
trol of the economy. 

Workers of the Cybernetics Insti- 
tute of the Ukrainian Academy of 
Sciences have estimated that the vo- 
lume of information involved in eco- 
nomic planning increases in propor- 
tion to the square of the volume of 
production. This means that in 20 
years more than half the population 
of the Soviet Union would be engaged 
_in management and administration. 

The economists are justified in 
waiting for the day when complete 


situation 


WW 


roduction 


a See 
BS | 
Lave =| 


automation of planning and economic 
calculations will become a reality. 

Mathematical methods could be cal- 
led the golden key that opens the 
doors into the mystery kingdom of 
economics. 

Of course, solving economic prob- 
lems is an extremely difficult thing. 
It has been shown that the higher the 
level of a nation’s productive forces 
the more complex is the task of run- 
ning its economy. The scope and com- 
plexity of calculations increase with 
the expanding volume of production, 


acceleration of growth rates, appea- 
rance of new industries, expansion of 
economic contacts. This is the reason 
for the extensive scale of work going 
on to use electronic computers to plan 
the economy of regions, republics and 
the Soviet Union as a whole. 

In Byelorussia, for example, machi- 
nes were used to calculate and intro- 
duce the most profitable plan of tim- 
ber haulage. In Leningrad plans were 
drawn up of river and marine ship- 
ping for all of the main river and 
marine basins. The Computer Centre 
of the State Planning Commission of 
the USSR calculated the best distri- 
buticn of suppliers and consumers of 
sheet metal and plate. In Turkmenia 
machines have been for several years 
carrying out a substantial portion of 
the economic calculations. 

Many such examples could be cited. 
It is not for nothing that V. Glush- 
kov, an eminent specialist in cyber- 
netics, claims that soon “automatic 
systems will become as essential a 
tool of scientific research in the hands 
of economists as atom smashers are 
for physicists or electron microscopes 
are for biologists”. 

Electronic computers not only help 
to accelerate calculations, they also 
provide for a ten- and hundredfold 
reduction in the time needed to draw 
up plans. Electronic machines used 
for economic operations ensure centra- 
lized industrial management. 

Economic management entails a 
kind of computer hierarchy. The “gro- 
und floor’, so to speak, houses the 
“lower echelons” charged with the 
collection, storing and processing of 
information. They allow for planning 
the work of factory shops, depart- 
ments and enterprises as a whole, pro- 
viding a day-to-day picture of the 


OPTIMAL CONTROL 235 


state of affairs. Then come the peri- 
pheral units for data processing and 
storage. These are electronic machines 
connected by communications chan- 
nels with the central “computer plants” 
of economic areas, industries or other 
amalgamations. 

Further on, at the top, is located a 
system for receiving, handling and 
storing information designed to pro- 
vide a comprehensive picture of the 
state of affairs in each specific indus- 
try and the economy as a whole. 

Experts consider that the creation 
of a national network for gathering, 
storing, processing and transmitting 
economic information is a_ priority 
task the importance of which can 
hardly be overrated. 

A planned socialist society should 
strive to attain the best possible, 
optimum results in each separate in- 
dustry and in the national economy as 
a whole. It was this that V. I. Lenin 
meant when he said that only that 
construction can deserve to be called 
socialist which is carried out accor- 
ding to a comprehensive general plan 
aimed at the balanced utilization of 
all economic and financial resources. 

V. I. Lenin repeatedly drew atten- 
tion to the importance of scientific 
organization of administrative work, 
without which it is impossible to run 
the economy correctly. He wrote that 
people working in management and 
administration must pass the test of 
knowledge of the fundamentals of 
theory of our state apparatus, of the 
fundamentals of the science of mana- 
gement. 

Nowadays mathematical methods 
are the basis of scientific manage- 
ment without which economic plan- 
ning of industry, science, technology 
and distribution of resources, man- 


236 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


power reserves, and direct, concrete 
factory management and control are 
simply unthinkable. 

The best variant of a plan for the 
development of the Kuznetsk basin 
coalfields in the years 1962-1970 had 
to be worked out. It was necessary to 
take into account the number of col- 
lieries, the grades of coal, labour ex- 
penditure and a thousand and one 
other considerations. There are some 
100 pits and cuts in the Kuzbas for 
which some 200 development variants 
had been provided. By using methods 
of mathematical planning the optimum 
variant for solving this complex pro- 
blem was found. It turned out that 
the development of the Kuznetsk ba- 
sin coalfields could be carried out 
with a capital investment 200 million 
roubles less than envisaged by the 
original “hand-made” plan. The com- 
puter-made plan proved 43 per cent 
more economical than the man-made 
one! Today economists increasingly re- 
ject “real-life” experiments and cost- 
ly “trial-and-error” quests. They pre- 
fer the better tool of mathematical 
modelling. Such modelling was em- 
ployed in the stupendous task of de- 
veloping a scientific model of the 
~ national economic development plan 
of the USSR for the years 19741-1975. 
Practical recommendations were ma- 
de on how to improve the development 
patterns for the economy as a whole 


"Some tea, sir? 


and for separate industries, how to 
make the most rational use of mate- 
rial and manpower resources, on the 
questions of economic reform. 

The new method makes it possible 
to forecast scientific and technological 
progress and its effect on the economy, 
assess natural resources, determine the 
optimum size of state reserves and 
optimize the structure of planning 
bodies themselves. 

In conclusion, to show the whole 
importance of application of cyberne- 
tics in the economy, we should like 
to refer to a major component of so- 
cialist planning—to the work of draw- 
ing up the national economic balance. 

This balance is a system of economic 
indices characterizing the principal 
correlations, proportions and rates of 
production, the sources and reserves 
for expanding the country’s national 
wealth and popular income. 

Mathematical methods make it pos- 
sible to establish all the proportions 
and connections in the national eco- 
nomy with great accuracy and to 
study its efficiency. In other words, 
we can now determine much faster 
and more accurately whether our na- 
tional wealth is being used correctly. 
And that wealth is great indeed. For 
example, the gross national product 
of the Soviet Union in 1968 was esti- 
mated at 500000 million roubles! 


Senior economist 


: 1 
You're overworking yourself!’ 


p 


PROGRAMMING 


The compilation of programmes 
for the solution of mathematical 
and information- 

logical problems 

on a digital computer: a chapter 
of applied mathematics 

dealing with the method 

of programme compilation. 


A Guide to the “Computer City” 


Let’s imagine the following situa- 
tion. A construction engineer who 
wants to calculate whether a project 
of a railway bridge has been drawn 
up correctly comes to the computer 
centre. His problem is expressed in 
purely mathematical terms: it con- 
tains formulae, equations, calcula- 
tions. Everything is at hand—take it 
and feed it into the computer. 

But, alas, the problem is for the 
computer a thing beyond its under- 
standing. The “electronic brain” can- 
not handle formulae, equations or 
calculations. 

The computer does not understand 
what man asks of it. 

How should the problem be adapted 
for the computer “mind”, how should 
the computer be made to understand 
it? 

That’s what the programmist 
knows. The programmist is the con- 
necting link between the computer 
and the problem it has to solve. 

His job is very responsible—he has 
to visualize the problem from the 
computer’s point of view. He has to 
subdivide any complex problem into 
a sequence of simple instructions that 
the computer could cope with. 

Every problem, even the simplest 
one, contains numerous instructions. 
Naturally, the more complicated is 
the problem, the longer is the list of 
instructions. 

This list, this set of instructions 
constitutes the programme for compu- 
ter operation. As you, probably, un- 
derstand, the compilation of program- 


237 


238 CYBERNETICS*A TO Z 


mes is a very difficult job requiring 
high qualification. This is because 
the programmist has first to visualize 
and then to realize in the computer 
all information transmission routes 
necessary for the execution of a defi- 
nite sequence of operations. 

The programme has been compiled. 
The routes for the solution of the prob- 
lem have been laid in the computer. 
Now the computer sets to work. 

Since we speak of problem solution 
routes, this means that some commu- 
nications, some channel is established 


between any two of the computer’s 
elements. The communications chan- 
nel must dispose of some sort of a 
“switchman” who either transmits 
information to a channel or blocks 
the way. 

The elements playing the part of 
the electronic “switchman” in the 
computer are called valves. The pur- 
pose of the programme is to provide 
instructions for the opening of a cer- 
tain group of valves while keeping the 
others closed. 

The work of the computer is gover- 


An example of the realization of a programme in a computer. 


Add number in register B 


to number in register A 


The sum to be sent to register C) 


Ww 
= 
= 
&lt; 
cc 
oO 
() 
io 
a 


Send from register B to 
; the adder 


Send from register A to 
the adder 


Send from the adder to 
register C 


CONTROL: DEVICE 


Register 
A 


ned by the control block—the main 
element of this intricate electronic 
contraption. This block, like a con- 
ductor conducting an orchestra, exer- 
cises control over different parts of the 
computer, tells each part when it 
should go into action, what and how 
it should do. The control block, like 


PROGRAMMING 239 


struction programme of the calcula- 
tions. This device concentrates in 
itself all the internal communications 
and “processes” all commands which 
control such a complex automaton 
as the high-speed electronic computer. 
Let’s take a look now at our “con- 
ductor” reading the “score”. 


the conductor, needs a “score”—in- 


So the control device works in close contact with the programme. 


The operator switches on the computer and inserts a programme containing a 

list of instructions that have to be performed in sequence in order to solve the 

roblem. 

: The programme in a digital computer is executed in sequence, as has been said 
before, in cycles, step by step, operation after operation. It is not to be wondered 
that this process is being compared to knitting: every part of the future product 
is made up of loops in different combinations. This is a very precise analogy, since 
existing knitting manuals, too, contain detailed instructions and calculations. 
And, like the electronic computer, programmes, these knitting manuals, are un- 
derstood only by the adept. 

An instruction has been received by the control device. It immediately “opens” 
the appropriate group of valves and makes the computer carry out the instruction. 
Suppose the instruction is: add the number in register B to the number in regis- 
ter A, send the sum to register C. 

The computer should open the group of valves which transmit numbers over 
the adder. This will cause the following instruction series to travel along commu- 
nications channels: “Send from register B to the adder”, “Send from register A to 
the adder”, “Send from the adder to register C”. 

Other valves will be needed for subtraction, etc. 

Have you noticed that each instruction consists of two parts: it tells “what to 
do” and “where to do it”. That’s just how specialists term them: the operation 
and the address part, or, simply, address. 

It must be admitted that in the computer the instructions look quite different 
from what’s shown in the drawing. They assume the familiar computer appearan- 
ce of number or sign codes. 


Let’s try to compile a computer 
programme for calculating the grea- 
test common divisor of two numbers 
a and b according to the well-known 
algorithm of Euclid. For this purpose 
we should have a list of operations. 
Suppose we have them written down. 
Let’s arrange them into a table and 


code each operation with a set [of 
binary symbols. Besides, we’ll desig- 
nate every operation briefly by letters. 
This will facilitate the compilation of 
the programme. 

Here’s a short table of operations 
which will help us to compile the 
programme: 


240 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


. ief desig- i 

Operation gir vrei : eeae 
Add number in cell No. to the number in the adder Ad 0004 
Subtract numbers in cell No. from the number in the 
adder Sb 0010 
Send number from cell No. to the adder having previ- 
ously set the adder to 0 Ss 0011 
Send number from the adder to cell No. Sn 0100 
Revert to instruction in cell No. Re 0104 
If the adder contains a number other than 0, revert to 
instruction in cell No. Is 0110 
If the number in the adder is negative revert to instruc- 
tion in cell No. In 0144 
Stop the computer St 1000 


To profit from the table one 
should keep in mind several important 
conditions. 

The first—when a number from the 
register cell is sent to the adder it is 
retained in the register as well. 

The second—when, on the other 
hand, a number from the adder is 


sent to the cell, the number which 
formerly occupied it is “erased”, and 
the newly sent number is installed 
in its place. The number which has 
been sent from the adder remains 
there unchanged. Moreover, we’ll have 
to remember that, if the numbers a 
and b are not equal, we’ll have to 


Cell contents 


Cell numbers designated by letters In binary code 
04 Ss—20 00410000010100 
02 Sb—21 00100000010104 
03 Is—05 01100000000101 
04 St 10000000000000 
05 Ss—20 004 10000010100 
06 Sb—21 00100000000104 
Cells 07 In—10 014110000001010 
containing 08 Sn—21 01000000010100 
instructions 09 Re—01 01010000000001 
10 Ss—21 00140000010104 
41 Sb—20 00100000010100 
42 Sn—21 0100000001010 
13 Re—01 01010000000001 
14 
15 
16 
17 
18 
19 
Cells containing 20 number a 


numbers 21 number b 


find out which of them is the greater 
and which the smaller. 

Man can do it easily just by taking 
a look at the numbers. The computer, 
on the other hand, always has to com- 
pare by orders. Therefore, the easiest 
way for the computer to find out 
which of two numbers is the greater 
is to perform subtraction. 

The sign of the remainder will tell 
it which is the greater and which is 
the smaller. 

Let’s start compiling the programme. 

We’ll place the instructions in the 
working “memory” cells No. 14 
through No. 13. The number a will 
be placed in cell No. 20, the number 
b in cell No. 214. 

The addresses of the register cells 
will be written down in the decimal 
system. 

Let’s see how the computer works 
using the table as a guide. The com- 
puter is switched on, and an instruc- 
tion is sent to the control device from 
the register cell 01. 

This instruction will be carried out 
during the next step. The adder pre- 
set to zero will receive the number 
from cell 20—the first number a. 
This number will remain in the adder. 
Next an instruction from cell 02 is 
sent to the control device. The result 
is the subtraction of the number b 
from cell 24 from the number a. 
This, as we shall see below, satisfies 
the second requirement of the Euc- 
lid’s algorithm concerning the com- 
parison of the two numbers. Now it 
is the turn of the conditional instruc- 
tion from cell 03. The control device 
checks the result of the foregoing ope- 
ration. 

If the remainder is zero, the num- 
bers are equal, and each of them is 
the greatest common divisor. The com- 


16—616 


PROGRAMMING 241 


putor prints the number, and _ the 
problem is solved. 

If, on the other hand, the remain- 
der is not zero, i.e. the numbers are 
not equal, the control device in com- 
pliance with the conditional instruc- 
tion will turn to the next instruction 
in cell 05 and later to cell 06. In com- 
pliance with the instructions contai- 
ned in these cells the number a from 
cell 20 will again be sent to the adder 
which has been preset to zero. There 
the number b from cell 21 will be 
subtracted from it. 

When a remainder accumulates in 
the adder, the conditional instruction 
from cell O07 is made to operate. 
If the remainder is negative, i.e. the 
second number is less than the first, 
they should, according to the algo- 
rithm, be made to change places. 

The conditional transition instruc- 
tion hands the control over to cell 40. 
The latter orders the second number b 
from cell 214 to be sent to the adder. 
Next the number from cell 20, i.e. 
the number a, is subtracted from it. 
The remainder which is positive is 
sent to cell 21 on the instruction of 
cell 12. Eventually the instruction 
of cell 13 again hands over control to 
cell 04. 

The cycle will be repeated in com- 
pliance with the fifth requirement of 
the algorithm. 

The number a, in this case the sub- 
trahend (because it is the smaller of 
the two numbers), is sent to cell 20. 
The remainder which now occupies 
cell 214 will be subtracted from it, etc. 

If, on the other hand, the remainder 
obtained after instructions 05 and 06 
have been carried out is positive, 
the instruction 07 will be followed 
by the instruction from cell 08. The 
positive remainder will be sent to 


242 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


ADDRESS NUMBER 


SEQUENCE OF OPERATIONS 


ADDER CONTENTS 


Send the contents of cell 0001 
to the adder 


Multiply by the contents ax 
of cell 1000 


Add to the contents 
of cell 0002: 


Multiply by the contents 
of cell 1000 


Subtract the contents 
of cell 0003 


SEQUENCE 
QF INSTRUCTIONS 
The “The 
executive 


ax+b 


ax?+bx 


ax?+6x—c 


Print the result 


An example of sear ga The sequence of instructions is shown on the left below. The trans- 


fer of the num 
35—addition, etc. 


cell 20, and computer control will 
be returned to cell 01 from cell 09. 
This, asin the case above, will be the 
beginning of a new cycle. 

During this cycle the place of the 
two numbers is, in accordance with 
the Euclid’s algorithm, taken by the 
subtrahend and the remainder. 

In this way the process of searching 
for the greatest common divisor will 
continue cycle after cycle until the 
numbers in cells 20 and 24 are equal. 


er to the summator is designated by 341, 37 is the multiplication of numbers, 


Thus, the whole programme is com- 
piled from 13 instructions. It enables 
the greatest common divisor of any 
pair of numbers to be found. The 
number of instructions is always the 
same. But the total number of repe- 
tition cycles will be different depen- 
dent on the numbers a and b. 

It’s easy to verify that if a=21, 
b=14, the third cycle will yield the 
greatest common divisor equal to 7. 
In case of multi-digit numbers, on 


the other hand, the number of cycles 
may be tens or even hundreds. 

Compilation of programmes for the 
solution of the more complex prob- 
lems requires great experience and 
substantial effort. 

It should be noted that without the 
programmes all electronic computers, 
even those capable of millions of ope- 
rations per second, are, aS a prominent 
computer expert Academician T. Mar- 
chuk once remarked, at best, merely 
items of furniture of institute and fac- 
tory offices. The entire line of calcu- 
lations in the computer, the so-called 
processing of information from input 
to output, is organized by the program- 
me. It’s the programme that ensures 
the execution of all operations assig- 
ned to the computer. 

The programmists prepare whole 
series of standard programmes for the 
solution of typical problems. The 
greater the programme file provided 
for the computer the better it is adap- 
ted for its work, the easier is its con- 
tact with the user, the greater are 
the facilities for its use and the grea- 
ter is its value. 

Nowadays computer manufacturers 
spare no efforts and no resources to 
produce computers equipped with a 
complete set of standard programmes. 
For example, at the American compu- 
ter production company IBM some 
one and a half thousand employees are 
permanently employed compiling pro- 


PROGRAMMING 243 


grammes for the computers produced 
by the company. 

The programme library compiled for 
the “1900”-type computer alone com- 
prises over 3.5 million instructions. 

Programme compilation has become 
a sort of an industry for the mathe- 
matical provision of computers. More 
money is spent on this industry than 
on the production of the computers 
themselves. Thus, about one billion 
dollars were spent on the procurement 
of programmes for the IBM-360 
computer. 

Well then, what is this mathemati- 
cal provision? It is a complex—lite- 
rally a multitude — of programmes 
assembled in special libraries. They 
enable the computer to operate effi- 
ciently, to carry out the solution of 
problems. They, in the words of the 
experts, mean the same to the compu- 
ters as college education means to 
people. 

Our days witnessed the birth of a 
new profession—that of the mathema- 
tical provision systems engineer. So 
much attention is being paid to the 
education of programmists because 
without them the exploitation of 
electronic computers at present em- 
ployed everywhere is impossible. 

A qualified programmist must re- 
ceive a serious mathematical educa- 
tion. Those who think of becoming 
programmists should study mathe- 
matics thoroughly. 


UThis rough has been malprogrammed again!"" 


244 PSYCHOLOGY, ENGINEERING 


The science 

which studies psychological aspects 
of man’s labour activity 

to assess his supreme 

psychical functions (memory, 
thinking, attention, 

perception, etc.). 


Man and Machine 


It first came into the limelight dur- 
ing the Second World War. At the 
time a great deal of technical sinews 
of war were engaged in the conflict. 
The battles were fought by very mo- 
bile and very sensitive machines: air- 
planes, tanks, submarines. 

The designers engaged in the pro- 
cess of development of certain machi- 
nes often witnessed the seemingly 
inexplicable phenomenon: new mili- 
tary machines did not yield the ex- 
pected results. 

What was the cause of this? Special 
research, experiments and tests have 
demonstrated that new machines did 
not correspond to functional abilities 
of men who were to take charge of 
them. 

This was actually the beginning of 
the new science of engineering psycho- 
logy. 

Men have grown so accustomed to 
the world of machines in which they 
live that they do not notice the tech- 
nical character of their environment, 
all those automata, aggregates, instal- 
lations, mechanisms, and the change 


in the character of work which took 
place in recent years. 

The progress in technology has, how- 
ever, greatly affected man’s work. 
Several decades ago man in industry 
did everything himself. Nowadays he 
controls the process of work using for 
this purpose various “organs” of the 
machines in his service. Having libe- 
rated himself from physical labour 
man increasingly assumes the role of 
the commander giving orders to me- 
chanisms which carry them out. 


This, however, is one side of the 
relationship between man and machi- 
ne. The machine, too, proved to be 
not indifferent to man, it, too, makes 
demands upon him. Modern machi- 
nes, automata in particular, require 
attention, memory, wits, quick reac- 
tion. 

The “demands” of the machines are 
so serious that a strictly scientific 
approach to their fulfilment is neces- 
sary. This is where engineering psy- 
chology comes in. As an engineering 
subject, engineering psychology stu- 
dies machines, devices, instruments 
and mechanisms. But these studies 
are “unidirectional”, from the spe- 
cific viewpoint of demands made by 
man’s mechanical aids on their crea- 
tor. As a psychological subject the 
new science is called upon to study 
human thoughts and their peculiari- 
ties, the faculties of man. But, again, 
from a strictly definite point of 
view: whether the individual proper- 
ties of a definite man are compatible 
with his profession. 

In the rather short period of its his- 
tory engineering psychology covered 
an arduous course interspersed with 
defeats and victories. At first it nego- 
tiated the more simple, to be more 


exact, the more noticeable, “techni- 
cal stage” (the subdivision is purely 
symbolic). Scientists started work on 
engineering problems connected with 
the style design of instruments, with 
the disposition of work places, with 
the colouring of work premises. The 
result was that such “trifles” as the 
arrangement of switches, tumblers, 
the shape of handles and knobs, their 
colour, the change of the colour of 
walls, the disposition of furniture in 
offices and of machine tools in shops 
contributed to a sharp rise in produc- 
tivity. 

Wasn’t that a success? 

You bet, and no small one, at 
that. 

The research methods of the second 
stage—the division being again sym- 
bolic—come closer to experimental 
psychology. Now scientists are work- 
ing on problems of another type—they 
are assessing supreme psychical func- 
tions of man. Specialists in engineer- 
ing psychology pay maximum atten- 
tion to such fundamental problems 
as memory, attention, thought, per- 
ception. 

What’s their goal? The aim is to 
construct machinery adapted for con- 
tact, collaboration, “community” 
with man, compatible with his facul- 
ties and capabilities. 

In the process of work man and 
machine are connected by a thousand 
strings, they are two links of the 
same chain. Therefore, one should 
know the facts both about the 
“machine” link and about the “man” 
link. 


Here’s a “man and machine” system. 


PSYCHOLOGY, ENGINEERING 245 


Engineering psychologists obtain 
precise and verified facts about the 
“man” link as a result of rigorous 
long-time experiments. 

Let’s take visual perception as an 
example. Studying its laws and spe- 
cific properties engineering psycholo- 
gists waste no time on exploiting them, 
on adapting them for practical pur- 
poses. The problem of optimum code 
for information to be displayed on the 
screen and on sign boards was solved 
in this way. 

In the course of research into visual 
perception the generally accepted as- 
sumption that man sees more than he 
can reproduce was corroborated, too. 

“What’s here unusual or unexpec- 
ted?” you’re going to ask. “Was there 
any use in proving things that are ob- 
vious without proof?” 

Well, there was. And for two rea- 
sons. Firstly, because the assumption, 
having been scientifically proven and 
argumented, becomes a fact. Second- 
ly, because the situation “we see more 
than we reproduce” is very fre- 
quent in everyday life. 

This situation arises when we per- 
ceive a telephone number in the tele- 
phone book and then dial it. The en- 
gineers, too, have to cope with this 
situation when choosing complex vi- 
sual indicators adapted to man’s ca- 
pabilities. 

This is a very important compo- 
nent of control of most intricate ag- 
gregates or technological processes, 
where man plays the part of the con- 
troller-operator of the united “man 
and machine” system. 


See how the functions of each block of this system are demarcated. In it man 
is supposed to play the part of a specific “subsystem”. His job is clearly defined: 


DY 


information 


0) 


organ 


System input i ; r System output 


PSYCHOLOGY, ENGINEERING 247 


he receives factual information from the machine, processes it into command in- 
formation and transmits it to the machine. 

The machine, too, has its functions which are no less clearly defined. The ma- 
chines on man’s command perform technological operations. 

True, the distribution of functions between man and machine may differ great- 
ly from case to case. 

What does it depend on? On the purpose of the system. 

Here is a mechanized production system. Here man has to perform all functions 
of regulation and control. 

Now we’ll go over to a system of a higher type —to the automated production 
system. Here the major part of these functions is entrusted to the machines. Man’s 
job is limited to planning operations as a whole. He makes important decisions, 
controls the work of the system in general, taking over the control in case of devia- 
tions from the programme. 

What’s the way of achieving best, optimum results of the combination of “ma- 
chine” and “human” properties in the “man-machine” system? What’s the way 
of attaining in the “man-machine” system maximum efficiency of the machine 
and minimum fatigue of man? The problem may be tackled from two opposite sides. 

Firstly, the machine should be better adapted to man. Secondly, as it is being 
done by engineering psychology, man should be “adapted” to the machine in the 
best way possible. 

Within the scope of engineering psychology come those links of the system whe- 
re man finds himself directly connected to the machine, where the transmission 
of information takes place. Does that mean that man himself, in the first place, 
serves as such a link? It certainly does. He perceives the information by his sen- 
ses. He processes information and transmits it to the control panel. When control- 
ling the machine he translates instructions into a convenient code that can be ea- 
sily understood by the machine. 


Engineering psychology began very 
close studies of man’s “capacity” as 
an “information channel”, or “com- 
munications channel”. Human “ca- 
pacity” viewed from this angle tur- 
ned out to be quite limited. This, at 
first glance, is a rather morbid con- 
clusion. There’s a limit beyond which 
man cannot reach. He cannot react 
to sound quicker than within the 
interval of 120-182 ms (milliseconds); 
to temperature changes—150-240 ms; 


to pain—400-1000 ms; to visual irri- 
tations—150-225 ms. These are rigo- 
rous objective figures. 

But as scientists turned to “subjec- 
tive” studies of various professions, 
it came to light that the human orga- 
nism possesses enormous resources, 
that it, so to speak, tries to “outdo 
itself”. 

Experienced grinders discern gaps 
of 0.6 » (micron), whilé man normally 
cannot see a gap below 10y. Textile 


&lt;q The information flux in the “man-machine” system. 


248 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


workers distinguish up to 100 shades 
of the black colour, steel workers dis- 
tinguish a very wide spectrum of 
shades of red, up to several hundred. 
Painters are able to discern the diffe- 
rence in the proportions of two objects 
as little as 0.006 of their dimensions. 

But here the legitimate question 
arises: is it always possible to 
“outdo oneself”, to reach beyond the 
limit? 

No, not always. High demands on 
the human organism in some cases 
lead to his resources being exhausted. 

Let’s take the example of aviation. 
According to American statistical da- 
ta, 80 per cent of accidents are due 
to errors made by pilots or control- 
lers because of excessive demands ma- 
de by the “machine” link on the 
“man” link. 

Soviet psychologists have discove- 
red one of the most interesting and 
important phenomena: the time nee- 
ded to find a solution is determined 
not by the volume of information, 
but by the number of “search steps”, 
i.e. the number of visual fixations, 
the number of stops made by the eye. 
This means that in designing a ma- 
chine, signals must be grouped in 
accordance with the properties of 
man’s visual system, so that for the 
same amount of information the eye 
of the operator would have to make 
less stops, less “search-steps”. For 
this reason specialists consider the 
rational arrangement of signals on the 
control panel to be of no less importan- 
ce than the composition of a painting. 
In both cases good composition aids 
perception. 

There is another very important 
field of action of engineering psycho- 
logy: to assess and develop man’s 
professional abilities, bring them up 


to the rising standards of modern 
technology. 

During tests to this effect man is 
given problems of increasing comple- 
xity, and scientists with the aid of 
special instruments assess his so-cal- 
led “progress coefficient”, his “abili- 
ty to develop his abilities”. This me- 
thod helps to find out whether a man 
can work in any of the professions re- 
quiring precise reaction, quick-wit- 
tiness, self-possession, orientation in 
an unforeseen situation. 

There are different sorts of people. 
Some—the “hot heads”—fully dis- 
play their abilities when unexpected 
decisions and quick actions are requi- 
red of them, when they are promp- 
ted by danger. Others in such circum- 
stances stand idle: they are unable 
to work, if they know that time is 
short, if they are disturbed by shrill 
noise, if something distracts them. 
In these circumstances they quickly 
become exhausted and forget habi- 
tual operations. But they are indis- 
pensable for carrying out observa- 
tions or doing work entailing prolon- 
ged absence of information—the “hot 
heads” are unable to cope with such 
tasks. 

This new interesting and important 
trend will help to find methods of 
speeding up the development of pro- 
fessional abilities, and man _ will 
achieve the skill of a great master not 
towards the end of his career, but in 
the prime of his life. 

Take, for instance, technical hear- 
ing. It was commonly accepted that 
a keen ear had to be inherent or could 
be acquired by long years of practice. 
Remember stories told about the pro- 
fessional keenness of ear of the pi- 
lots—they are able to notice devia- 
tions of the engine rpm (revolutions 


Acceleration 


PSYCHOLOGY, ENGINEERING 249 
10 100 


10° ~=02 104 


LTT) 
QA 


The comparison between the allowable limits of acceleration, radiation and temperature for man 
and automaton on a journey into outer space is not in favour of man. 


per minute) from the normal as small 
as three per cent. 

The scientists at the laboratory of 
labour psychology of the Academy of 
Pedagogical Sciences following meti- 
culous research carried out into the 
properties of technical hearing deve- 
loped express methods of training. 

Workers at the Perm telephone 
plant, before being sent to shops, 
before jobs and duties are assigned to 


them, are examined by psychologists. 
Scientists assess innate qualities of 
every man and his ability to develop 
them. This enables to predict the job 
that will be to the man’s liking, and 
to avoid wasting time and resources 
on teaching people jobs that they 
will not regard as fit for them. 
Nowadays engineering psychology 
faces some very important problems. 
There is, on the one hand, the rapid 


250 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


process of liberating man, of facilita- 
ting his command functions. On the 
other hand, progress in bionics leads to 
new, closer ties between man and 
machine. Namely, machine control by 
means of speech and biocurrents is 


being considered. Biotechnical systems 
capable of receiving various signals 
from the human organism are coming 
into use. But these problems still re- 
main to be solved. 


251 


Q 


QUALITY CONTROL 


The reception 

and processing of information 
which compares the parameters 
of an object 

with preset values. 


The Sentry at the Border 


Just imagine what would happen in 
plants and factories if the control of 
the quality of finished products, of 
technological processes would stop for 
a time. The factories would have to 
stop working, for no one needs pro- 
ducts of inferior quality. 

In modern industry quality control 
is one of the most important forms 
of control. It may be said that there’s 
no production without quality control. 

Evidently, the importance of qua- 
lity control in automated production 
is much greater. Naturally, automated 
production requires automated con- 
trol. 

What is the job of a controller—be 
it a man or an automaton? It keeps 
an eye on parts being produced to en- 
sure that they are of the right size, 
within the acceptable limits, on the 
temperature so that it should not rise 
above or sink below preset values, on 
a chemical process to hold it on the 
correct course. In this the controller 
is aided by information on the course 
of specific processes and about devia- 
tions from preset values. Without such 
information timely intervention in the 
course of processes is impossible. 

It is easy to imagine the logic of a 
control operation: “If the event A has 
occurred, the operation B should be 
performed; if the event was C the ope- 
ration to be performed is D.” 

' The chapter “Automatics” deals at 


‘length with the “sense organs of mo- 


dern technology”: with sensors ca- 
pable of penetrating anywhere, with 
amplifiers capable of million-fold am 
plification of the control signal, with 


252 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


specialized mechanical, electrical, and 
optical controllers, fast, compact, fle- 
xible, ensuring the necessary regula- 
tion procedure. There’s in addition a 
vast army of tracking systems to 
watch over “law and order” in pro- 


terms to the machine tool or the pro- 
duction line, force them to operate 
in a strictly orthodox manner. 

At this juncture it would be bene- 
ficial to show how the quality control 
is being accomplished and how multi- 


duction shops. They dictate rigid farious this process is. 


The control process usually consists of two stages. The first is the perception 


of information about the state of the object, and the second is the separation from 
the incoming information of that part of it which pertains to the quantity being 
controlled. 

This is usually done in laconic language: “yes-no”, “too much-standard-too 
little”, ‘“operational-nonoperational”. 

Everyone knows how important accurate measurements in quality control are. 

Modern technology is able to produce automatic quality controllers with a 
memory. Such a controller will not only find errors, but will memorize them, make 
an analysis of them, draw conclusions and tell the machine tool what to do to 
avoid rejects. 

Devices working in conjunction with automatic flow-lines may serve as an 
example of fully automated quality control. 

There are even whole factories working on the “super-closed shop” principle 
without people and, thanks to automatic control, producing high-quality goods. 
This applies to hydro-electric stations and continuous process chemical plants. 
Here the centralized control embraces everything: quality of product, state of 
equipment, quantity and composition of semi-products. 

The quality control (technological control) in engineering industry, on the 
other hand,-is decentralized. It is carried out at principal operation stages, in the 
process of transportation and at special multi-operational control stations. There 
are special machines for sorting and filtering out rejects and for control of finished 

roducts. 
4 Nowadays, with the: advent of automated production control systems the qua- 
lity control is carried out by special devices coupled to electronic computers. 

And what about the forms of control? They are numerous. Single parameter 
control, as its name implies, controls only one specific parameter with one gauge 
of the simplest type. 

Multi-parameter control, as distinct from the single-parameter control, wat- 
ches over numerous parameters with the aid of many well-coordinated instruments, 
machines or even whole systems. This control is, as a rule, centralized. 

Methods of control are also subdivided into series, parallel and series-parallel. 
In the first, information is received, in turn, from several control sources. In the 
second, information is received continuously and simultaneously from many sour- 
ces over multiple channels. The third, as may be easily guessed, combines both 
former methods. 

There’s also the logic control which entails the utilization of the result of mea- 


Carrier error 


Programme 
error 


QUALITY CONTROL 253 


Intermediate 
error 


Control error 


Calculate anew 
or rewrite 


Replacement of the 
faulty system element 
and its repair 


Erasing the faulty Continue work with 
Programme and the risk of incurring Repetition 


recording a new one an undetected error 


These are the operations which have to be performed in case of computer errors of various types. 


surements and control for self-tuning, for assessment of variations in conditions 


of some process. 


Sporadic control is carried out as the need arises, from time to time, or in ans- 
wer to automatic signals in case of rare but substantial deviations. 

A more complex type of control, the multi-stage control, abides by the principle 
of hierarchy: the higher the control stage, the higher is the quality of machining 
or the accuracy of a process. Such control involves the collection of information 


from all the branches of the factory. 


It’s no easy job to effect quality 
control in industry. The above list 
was quite impressive. And still, it 
didn’t mention local control, distant 
control, telemechanical control. 


It must be said in addition that 
since the time electronic computers 
began to be used, the problem loomed 
of controlling the quality of their 
work. Now it is necessary to discou- 


254 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


rage the clever machines from making 
silly mistakes, to see that they do 
their calculations correctly. This is 
one of the principal problems of de- 
signing digital electronic computers. 
The problem is very complicated for 
even a dust particle on the magnetic 
memory tape may lead to an error. 
Try and find it afterwards! 
Unhappily, existing methods of 
computer control do not guarantee 
absolute and continuous quality of 
calculations. A complete and detailed 
control procedure is, as yet, lacking, 
and the users of the ultra-fast and 
ultra-accurate electronic computers are 
still liable to suffer from their fancies 
—there are instances when the com- 
puter hands out an erroneous result. 
There are various procedures for 


controlling the work of electronic 
computers. They are subdivided into 
the programme control and circuitry 
control methods. Each of the latter is 
subdivided, in its turn, into proce- 
dures of control in the process of prob- 
lem solution and of control outside 
the operational cycle. 

The simplest way of controlling the 
quality of computer operation, from 
logic considerations, would be to re- 
peat specific cycles or replace the 
faulty block. It is also obvious that 
it is easier to control the information 
transmission circuits of the computer 
than the arithmetical operations. The 
problem of detecting and excluding all 
possible errors in the computer con- 
trol system may, however, turn out to 
be insolvable. 


"Berry it’s too cold!” 


RELIABILITY 


The probability for some device 
to operate 

without failure 

during a given time. 


Index of. Trust 


Don’t look for the word “reliabili- 
ty” in Encyclopaedia Britannica, you 
won’t find it there. Why? Because it 
is only recently that this word became 
a concept indispensable to science, 
technology and industry. 

A few facts will do to explain how 
the problem of reliability arose. Dur- 
ing the Second World War 60% of 
aviation equipment sent by the USA 
to the Far East proved to be deficient. 
Another 50% of equipment and spares 
deteriorated in storage. Tests showed 
that radar equipment remained inope- 
rable for 84% of storage time, sonar 
equipment for 48%, and radio com- 
munication equipment for 14%. 

Let’s get down to business and, dis- 
pensing with introductory remarks, 
discuss the meaning of reliability. 
This will be explained by the promi- 
nent Soviet mathematician Professor 
B. Gnedenko. 

Should we test the life of some elec- 
tronic tubes from the same lot we 
would find that each of them worked 
for a different time. 

It is impossible to predetermine how 
long any given tube will operate 
without failure. It is only possible to 
specify the number of tubes from a 
large lot which will, on the average, 
remain in operation after a given time. 

In other words, the life of each tube 
as well as of any other product is a 
random quantity. And the job of 
Scientists is to calculate the probabi- 
lity of failure-free operation of a de- 
vice during its specified life-time. 
They call this probability the reliabi- 
lity. 


255 


256 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Think of an interplanetary space- 
station. How complicated its work is! 
For this work to be successful the 
entire equipment of the station must 
operate without failure during the 
whole time the station is in orbit. In 
other words, all equipment of the 
station must display great reliability, 
i.e. the probability of failure of any 
element must be small. 

To assess the importance of the term 
“reliability” we will have to engage 
in some trivial talk on the complexi- 
ty of the world of modern machinery 
and instruments. 

That will need some examples to 
illustrate the point. 

A conventional electronic tube has 
some 60-90 parts. And the equipment 
on board the manned spaceship Vos- 
tok weighing 2000 kg (the total we- 
ight of the ship being 4625 kg) was 
made up of 300 instruments, which, 
in turn, contained 240 tubes, 6300 
semiconductor devices, 760 electro- 
magnetic relays and switches. All 
this complicated equipment had to 
operate during a long time in condi- 
tions of substantial overloads, vib- 
rations and rapid changes of tempera- 
ture and pressure. It was quite na- 
tural for the scientist-astronaut, Doc- 
tor of Technical Sciences K. Feoktis- 
tov to write: “Reliability became as 
important to astronautics as. air to 
man—without reliability it could not 
exist at all.” 

Let’s continue with our examples. 

An electronic computer consists of 
tens of thousands of tubes, semicon- 
ductor diodes and triodes, resistors, 
connections and soldered joints. 

The control system of the American 
intercontinental ballistic missile At- 
las contains over 300 thousand ele- 
ments. 


And the reliability of such a com- 
plex depends on its weakest element 
—the one that’s going to fail first. 

Even in case every element is ca- 
pable on the average of ten thousand 
hours of failure-free operation, every 
two minutes one failure, one fault is 
to be expected. 

Does that mean that the more com- 
plex a system is the less reliable it 
is? As Academician A. Berg once ap- 
tly remarked, the stone axe was su- 
perior in reliability to modern in- 
stallations—there was nothing in it 
that could fail. 

Academician Berg cites another ex- 
ample which demonstrates the influ- 
ence of the reliability of individual 
parts of the machine on its reliabili- 
ty as a whole. 

The results of tests of one computer 
prototype were little promising, it 
did not live up to reliability require- 
ments. The investigation of the cau- 
ses of it revealed that the reliability 
of the commonest parts—the carbon 
resistors—was unsatisfactory. This 
simple part is produced from nine mate- 
rials: ceramics, brass, enamel, abra- 
sives, etc. Each part goes through 
twelve technological processes, and 
each of them influences the reliability. 

In the computer prototype which 
was subjected to tests there were some 
600 thousand carbon resistors. Let’s 
calculate now the number of factors 
which influence the reliability of this 
computer only through the medium 
of the resistors. The number will 
be 600 000x9x12=64 800 000! An 
enormous number! And the computer 
contains, besides, several tens of thou- 
sands of other parts. 

The reliability of complex systems 
and machines in every field has its 
own criteria. In instrumentation it is 


“ROBOTS” (pp. 260-268) 


THE MECHANISM 
OF THE MUSICIAN 


ROBOTS 


MYTHICAL ROBOTS 
CLOCK WORK ROBOTS 
ELECTRICAL ROBOTS 


k OBO 7s 


ELECTRICAL ROBOTS 


B 


ni, 


TS 
ELECTRONIC ROBO 


RELIABILITY 257 


nonrestorable 


restorable 
nonrestorable 


restorable 


The classification of products in the theory of reliability. Some products—the elements of ra- 
dio-equipment, instruments, resistors, machine parts, bearings—are not regenerated. Others— 
electronic computers and control devices, cars, machine tools—are. Some, for instance, devi- 
ces carried by rockets or satellites, are not regenerated in flight but are regenerated during sto- 
rage or flight preparation. 


the accuracy, in hydraulics the ab- 
sence of failures in various operation 
conditions. The criterion of computer 
reliability is the accuracy of input, 
processing and output of processed 
information. 

If a calculating device is unreliab- 


le, you have to expect mistakes and 
distortions. Some unreliability, even 
if it is extremely small, is common 
to all man-made products. There- 
fore, the problem of increasing relia- 
bility looms large before science and 
technology. 


There are several means to achieve this aim. 

First and foremost it is the incessant improvement of the reliability of every 
element, every part of the unit, of the system. The more reliable a link, the more 
reliable is the chain as a whole. 

But it is not always that this parameter should be improved by all means, for 
the costs may prove too high. 

What should be done in such cases? 

Having first heard of it you would’t believe: build a reliable machine from in- 
sufficiently reliable elements. And the “unbelievable” method is being explored 
by scientists. This is how it is applied to logical computers on “relay elements”. 

Suppose the device consists of three relays the contacts of which may be open 
or closed. It is easy to calculate that the total number of contact states is eight 
in accordance with the number of various combinations of open and closed relays. 
Each state fulfils some function, for instance that of control. A defect in one of 


17—G1G 


258 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Series connection 
1 METHOD OF ‘ 
"REPETITION" = 


Series-parallel connection 


By es Oe ees, t 
ee ae Oe ot 
fecebae ete 

2 seston, eae a The ‘‘brick-wall” circuit 


Parallel connection 


STRUCTURES” CS 
An infinite net-like circuit 


A simple net-like circuit 


3 METHOD OF . 
VOTING’ 


There are several ways of creating redundancies. The method of “repetition” involves the assem- 
bly of a new circuit and the multifarious connection of it. The method of “net-like structures” 
helps when both the main and the reserve structures are liable to failure. “Voting” involves the 
replacement of the entire device or its block by an identical one and the connection of addi- 
tional special devices—the mixers. 


the states leads to another state. Since each state strictly corresponds to its own 
control command the defect will lead to a wrong instruction, and the system will 
make a mistake. 

Can anything be done about it? Yes, it can. The number of relays should be in- 
creased, and out of the possible states only such should be chosen for contro] pur- 
poses which do not in case of errors coincide with some other state. 

This is termed creating a redundancy and has an analogy in nature which is 
rich in excellent reliable systems made up of less reliable elements. For example, 
the human brain as a system is infinitely more reliable than its single element — 
the neuron: the organism operates even in case millions of neurons are put out of 


RELIABILITY 259 


action. Try and find some technical device that would continue to function pro- 
perly after the failure of only one of its elements! 

Redundancy is a promising trend. Appreciable results have already been ob- 
tained, still greater results are expected. Yet specialists do not consider this to 
be the main road to high reliability. 

Couldn’t a system, machine or device be designed that would give automatic 
warning of a possible failure of a part, a unit or a block and that would, moreover, 
automatically switch a reserve block, assembly or part into operation? Like a 
living organism that sets in operation its reserve channels to preclude the possibi- 
lity of stoppage. 

Work in this direction has already started. 

Today some machines control their own operations and give warning signals 
in case any defects arise. 

Other machines are capable of testing their own electronic devices and of detec- 
ting 99.9% of tubes or other parts liable to failure. 

At the Institute of Automatics and Telemechanics of the Academy of Sciences 
of the USSR a group of scientists headed by Academician V. Trapeznikov have 
built a digital computer which in case of failure hands out its own “diagnosis” 
immediately showing the place of failure of some block or part. 

As a result of the application of such advances in modern technology the relia- 
bility of big computers rose to nearly 98%. This means that the computers work 
efficiently 85% of the time (with the exception of time reserved for inspection 
and maintenance). A case has been reported of a computer, consisting of 13 thou- 
sand micro-circuits, working faultlessly for 33 thousand hours. This is a great 
factor of reliability, though not the uppermost. 


Scientists attack reliability along 
a wide front—they use every possible 
means to increase the computer’s 
“index of trust”. The battle for re- 
liability has in effect only just star- 
ted. But one should heed the warning 
of the experts that the problem of 
reliability, though satisfactorily sol- 
ved today, will arise in a new form 
tomorrow and will never disappear 
as long as technical devices utilized 
by man are being developed and com- 
plicated. 


1! 
7 


‘ 
Pi 
E% 


" Look here, | think I’ve found why it 
doesn’t work !™ 


20 ROBOT | 


A model or an automaton 
having the appearance of a man, 
often designed 

for practical work. 


“Eric”, “Tinker”, “Siberian” and the 
Rest 


Probably, no one now needs ex- 
plaining what a robot is. We have 
grown used to these clumsy, slow me- 
tal likenesses of man, to their eyes 
of lamps, to their ears of aerials, 
to their monotonous, indifferent mag- 
netic-tape-recorder voices. We are no 
longer wondering at them, we greet 
them as good old friends. 

Do you know that robots have a 
long and interesting history? 

The first mechanical man, the le- 
gend would have it, was built in an- 
cient times by Ptolemy Philadelphus. 

-His younger—by many hundred 
years—brother made history under 
the name of the “iron man”. He was 
built by Albert the Great over 700 
years ago. From that time onwards 
he has made his home on the pages 
of dozens of books. 

Mechanical men “mastered” many 
professions, mainly “delicate” ones. 
Abundant were flute and drum play- 
ers, dancers, scribes. Rare among 
the robots were the trades of painters, 
bakers, hair-dressers. 

All of them, irrespective of trade, 
were built with the greatest crafts- 
manship . 


The following story serves as a 
tribute to the art of their creators. 

The famous French mechanic Jac- 
ques de Vaucanson decided to build 
a weaving automaton. The weavers of 
Lyons learned about it. Theinventor’s 
idea was not to their liking, and they 
decided to give Vaucanson a beating. 
Then to make fun of the weavers the 
brilliant mechanic built an ass who 
worked at a loom. 


The enthusiasm for mechanical 1- 
kenesses of man vanished at the be- 
ginning of the 19th century. From 
noisy reception halls of palaces, from 
royal castles the “mechanical men” 
moved to quiet museum halls. And 
here they rest to this day, these “un- 
animated men”, which served to en- 
tertain the nobility. Is it only be- 
cause of their strange “fate” that these 
artful dolls are of interest to us? Cer- 
tainly not. The mechanical men are 
of interest to us, in the first instance, 
because they occupy a place at the 
start of the road which led to_the de- 
velopment of automata. 


New times brought new ideas. The 
era of electricity was marked by the 
construction of “electrical men”. They 
had advantages over their mechanical 
“relatives” not only in the principle 
of operation but also in the number 
of man-like functions they could per- 
form, since earlier artificial mechani- 
cal men were able to perform only 
one function each: the draftsman 
drew, the cittern player played the 
cittern, the scribe wrote, etc. 

Meet the “electrical man”. 

His author, the American engineer 
Vansley called him deferentially “Mis- 
ter Televox”. 

Clumsy, squarely built, eyes and 


nose painted. His looks were very 
much inferior to those of his mecha- 
nical predecessors, but there was a 
lot he could do. 

“Televox” worked as a permanent 
supervisor of the water tanks of one 
of New York’s skyscrapers. He wat- 
ched the water level, switched on 
water pumps. 

Moreover, “Televox” had sound re- 
producing apparatus installed in him 
and could pronounce several phrases. 
He answered telephone calls about 
water level and pump operation. 

This work is much more complica- 
ted than the work of a mechanical 
musician. Judge for yourselves: now- 
adays the work similar to that of 
“Televox” is being done by automa- 
ted traffic controllers in numerous 
automated plants. 

In addition to serious “professio- 
nal” work “Televox” was employed 
in house work. He switched on the 
vacuum cleaner and the ventilator, 


ROBOT 261 


lamps in the room, opened the win- 
dows and shut the doors. “My robot,” 
said the inventor, “without its shell 
is actually an automatic telephone 
exchange, to which several electric 
motors are connected instead of tele- 
phone subscribers.” 

These electric motors performed all 
the actions of “Televox”. In other 
words, “Televox” was a typical repre- 
sentative of “electrical men”. 

His counterparts of the time were 
in close affinity to him. Among them 
were the “Englishmen”: “Eric” built 
by engineer Richardson, “Alpha”, the 
creation of the professor of physics 
Harry May, the robot “Willy” of 
Westinghouse, and many, many 
others. 

Robots of today are electronic crea- 
tures. One of them, an electronic ci- 
tizen of Kaliningrad, says to this 
effect: “I have no heart. I’m doing 
well with transistors and intricate 
electronic blocks.” 


On p. 262 is the block diagram of the robot “Siberian-2”. He can do the job 


of a guide to exhibitions, sell lottery tickets and books, advertise products and 
polish floors. 

The robot consists of 19 blocks. The main blocks are the control blocks of the 
head, of the right arm, of leg action and of body rotation. A very important part 
in the “Siberian” is played by the programming device and time relay. 

Here’s a description of the robot by its inventors from the city of Omsk: “The 
robot draws power from the mains. The voltage of 27 V is applied to the program- 
mator through the sound relay. There it is transformed into programme pulses. 
For instance, the ‘leg’ control block receives two programmes. The first sends the 
robot on his way forward. To change course or to turn back a second programme 
is needed. How does the robot turn a corner? An instruction is sent from the pro- 
grammator to the control block, and the motor is switched on. After the corner 
has been turned a second signal is sent—this time to the stopping block, which 
switches the motor off. At the same time a tape recorder with recorded speech is 
switched on. As a result the robot turns and, for example, tells the visitors to the 
exhibition about some exhibit. 

“The movements of the right arm are somewhat more complicated. Simulta- 
neously with the motor a device is switched on which, say, hands out lottery tick- 


262 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Mill 


/ 


| 


= vITT hae 


N 
N 
N\ 
Ny 
N 
N 
\\ 


ae 


—&lt; 
= 
— 
— 


Contact finger 


Sound block 


Automatic card 
distributor 


Electric motor 


Loudspeaker 
Signalling block 
Head-turning device 
Electric motor 


Electronic block 


Magnetic tape 
recorder 


Programmator 


Turning block 
Step-down transformers 


Electromagnetic device 


Leg-movement device 


The “Siberian-2” robot was built by boys from the Omsk municipal vocational school. 


ets stored in the robot’s pocket. Having clutched the ticket, the robot firmly 
holds it with his ‘fingers’ —contacts. As soon as a visitor takes the ticket the fin- 
gers are brought into contact, and the order ‘return to zero’ is sent. The arm mo- 
tors are switched on, and the robot resumes its former posture.” 


These “electronic men” that have 
gone a long way from the superficial 
likeness to man can do a lot of the 
things we can do. 

The first thing that meets the eye 
is the “wide range” of their profes- 


sions and the compatibility of these 
professions in a single robot. 
Some robots possess faculties pecu- 
liar only to them: for instance, they 
can have sense organs which are de- 
nied to man. For example, the robot 


“TIITY” not only sees light, hears 
sound, feels heat, and notices obstac- 
les and avoids them artfully, but 
reacts to radioactivity, as well. Seve- 
ral metres away from the danger 
zone it sends various warning signals. 

Don’t you agree that now the time 
has come to speak not only of robot 
toys? Real robot-assistants have made 
their appearance. 

Nowadays “electronic dwarfs” are 
engaged in testing cars and planes, in 
shops with an unhealthy atmosphere; 


ROBOT 263 


they sink to the depths of the 
oceans, rise in rockets to carry out 
cosmic studies. 

With the aid of robots functions and 
behaviour of living organisms are 
being simulated with the aim of crea- 
ting better engineering constructions 
and automata; biological processes 
are being modelled to gain insight 
into their essence. 

Already now scientists are allot- 
ting serious scientific tasks to robots. 
How much more is in store for them! 


264 


S 


SELF-ADAPTING SYSTEM 


A system 

whose method of action 
changes automatically 

to attain optimum control. 


The Way to a “Clever” Automaton 


Imagine a comprehensive automa- 
tic system which responds instantly 
to any change in the mode of opera- 
tion or of the ambient. A rise in tem- 
perature—an instant reaction follows. 
An unexpected drop of pressure—im- 
mediate action of the gauges, and it 
returns to normal. An unforeseen de- 
ficiency in the composition of a li- 
quid—the system compensates for it 
the very moment it arises. 

What a grand automaton, you 
would say; surely, it doesn’t exist. But 
it does! It’s the living organism. The 
living organism, we, human beings 
in particular, is this most advantage- 
ous, superb, optimum system, “whose 
method of action changes automati- 
cally to attain optimum control”. 

Self-adaptation is an invaluable 
quality of the living organism deve- 
loped through the millions of years of 
its history, the ideal the designers of 
modern automata are trying to at- 
tain. The advent of cybernetics enab- 
led a truly bold problem to be formu- 
lated: can the adaptation of living 
organisms to their ambient be regar- 
ded as an analogue for technical auto- 
matic systems subjected to changing 
influences? 

Here we'll have to deviate some- 
what from our main road in order to 
return later enlightened by knowledge 
that will help us on our way. 

We'll have to get acquainted with 
such seemingly simple conceptions as 
a good and a bad organization. 

At first glance it’s perfectly simple: 
a good organization is the one that 
reacts correctly, a bad one that which 


always reacts wrongly. So it appears 
at first glance. An organization is des- 
cribed as good if it works faultlessly 
and operates within some strictly 
defined limits, i.e. operates well no 
matter what it is—a cat, an automa- 
tic pilot or an automatic plant. 

Wait a little, says to this a promi- 
nent English scientist W. Ashby, 
inquisitiveness is a good thing, but 
just think of the many antelopes who 
died because they stopped to look at 
the hunter’s hat. 

There is no quality or faculty of 
the brain unequivocally accepted as 
desirable in one situation that doesn’t 
become undesirable in another, main- 
tains the scientist. And he cites some 
examples. Here’s one. 

Is it good or bad for the brain to 
have memory? It’s good, if the am- 
bient is such that the future often re- 
peats the past. If the events in future 
would be opposite to those in the past, 
memory would be a disadvantage. 

This situation occurs when a rat 
living in sewage tubes encounters a 
bait. The rat is very suspicious. and 
accepts unfamiliar food only in small 
portions. But if delicious food ap- 
pears in the same place for three days 
tunning, the rat learns it. On the 
fourth day it takes the bait boldly 
and poisons itself. 

A rat devoid of memory (a bad or- 
ganization by usual standards) will 
on the fourth day be as suspicious as 
on the first and will survive. Thus, 
in such conditions memory is a dis- 
advantage. Does it follow that it 
isn’t possible to distinguish “good” 
from “bad”, that any organization 
can at the same time be good and 
bad? 

At this point we return io our for- 
mer road and arrive at the self-adap- 


SELF-ADAPTING SYSTEM 265 


ting system. Its trick is that it chan- 
ges from “bad” to “good” by itself. 

Let’s take the well-known example 
of a child’s brain. At first its working 
is such that the child is always attract- 
ed by fire. The organization is clear- 
ly a bad one. As a result of the expe- 
rience obtained a new—“good”—or- 
ganization comes into being: now the 
child avoids the fire, the brain as a 
system had adapted itself. 

Is such self-adaptation possible in 
a technical system? Just think how 
wonderful it would be! The automa- 
ton would function satisfactorily not 
only under normal conditions, but 
under break-down conditions as well, 
could “level out” in any operating 
condition, would work like a man. 

Self-adapting systems are classified 
by their behaviour. The simplest self- 
tuning systems choose optimum ope- 
rating conditions with regard to am- 
bient conditions. Such systems are 
increasingly being used in technolo- 
gy: 
For instance, it is possible to bu- 
ild a self-tuning machine tool control- 
led by a programme. In this case the 
controlling device must mark the de- 
viations in the dimensions of parts 
being produced and automatically 
effect changes in the programme. In 
this case an initially deficient pro- 
gramme will be improved in the cour- 
se of the tool’s operation, and rejects 
will be minimized. Scientists term 
this tuning for better operating con- 
ditions “self-improvement by the ma- 
chine tool of its algorithm”, of its 
working programme. 

If the system can improve the algo- 
rithm of-its operation, it can improve 
the algorithm of its behaviour, as 
well, make it “flexible”, “searching”, 
adaptable to the ambient. Such a 


266 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


—— 


PSs SS 


A self-tuning machine tool: 1—programme block; 2—self-tuning block; 3—“memory” block; 
4—control block; 5—actuator; §—measuring system. The process of self-tuning consists in 
searching for better results on the basis of results previously obtained. The tool itself works 
out an improved programme which takes into account former deficiencies in machining. 


system, which changes its mode of It occupies a position one step above 
action in unforeseen circumstances, the self-tuning system. 
is usually described as self-organizing. 


A Classical Example ot a Self-Organizing System Is the Homeostat of W. Ashby. 
Here is a description of the principles of operation of this device. 
The homeostat consisted of 4 electromagnets. The motion of their cores displaced 
the contacts of rheostats. The electromagnets were fed through these rheostats. 
Maximum displacement of a core caused an arbitrary switch-over of connections 


SELF-ADAPTING SYSTEM 267 


of the rheostats and electromagnet windings in the circuit. The positions of all 
four cores were thus interrelated since the current in each solenoid was dependent 
on the position of all four rheostats, and the position of each rheostat was depen- 
dent on the current flowing through the respective solenoid. 

As soon as power was switched on all cores and rheostat contacts began to move. 
The resulting situation could be twofold: after some transient process the cores 
could occupy a stable intermediate state—in this case the system became sta- 
tionary; in another case the system failed to find for itself a stable state, and as a 
result one of the cores exceeded the range of normal displacement and reached the 
limiter. This led to arbitrary connections in the circuit, after which the search 
for equilibrium was continued. After several switchings leading to arbitrary con- 
nections in the circuit of the homeostat the system ultimately attained a state 
compatible with equilibrium and then found this equilibrium. 


Ashby’s homeostat is a device which it isn’t easy to put off balance. 


Measurement panel 


influence 


Control 
element 


device 


Control system 


c 
° 
ra] 
oO 
Ss 
is) 
&gt; 
o 
E 
oO 
P=) 
2) 
&gt; 
7) 
! 
o 
&lt;= 
+ 
rs 
5° 
- 
oO 
- 
Ww 


Signals changing 
the system 


268 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


'- Altogether 400 thousand combinations of switch positions were envisaged in 
the system. Various operations to which the homeostat was subjected, such as dis- 
placement of the limiters, changes in connections, petty failures, did not destroy 
its ability to find the equilibrium state. 

The “behaviour” of the homeostat can be compared to the behaviour of a cat. 
If you push it, it’ll make itself comfortable and fall asleep again. The same with 
the homeostat: when it’s being pushed —displaced from the state of equilibrium — 
it “makes itself comfortable”, tries various connections, and then “falls asleep” 
again, again finding a state of equilibrium. 

The experiments with the homeostat were highly praised by Norbert Wiener. 
He considered Ashby’s brilliant idea of a purposeful, arbitrarily chosen mechanism 
capable of attaining its ends through the process of learning to be not only one of 
major achievements of modern philosophy but an achievement leading to very 
useful technological results in the solution of automation problems, as well. He 
thought that we were in a position not only to make the machine follow its purpose, 
but, for the most part, a machine designed to avoid certain break-down situa- 


tions would find aims for itself that it was capable of attaining. 


Here’s another example of a self- 
organizing system—the modelling of 
the process of survival on an electro- 
nic computer. 

Imagine a computer the memory of 
which contains the numbers from 0 
to 9 quite arbitrarily mixed. In this 
computer all numbers are multiplied 
by pairs, and the number on the right 
end of the product takes the place of 
the first multiplier. Let’s put the 
computer to work. We know that an 
even number multiplied by another 
even number gives a third even num- 
ber. Odd, multiplied by odd, also 
gives odd, and odd multiplied by 
even gives even. The conclusion can 
be drawn that after mixed encounters 
the number of even numbers in the“me- 
mory” of the computer will grow—the 
even numbers have greater chances of 
“survival”. Gradually they will take 
the places of odd numbers in the com- 
puter “memory”. The computer has 
“organized itself” for “survival”. In 
time the practice of this purposeful 
behaviour will lead to the eradication 


of all odd numbers from the computer 
“memory”. 

This “wise” class of self-adapting 
automata includes yet another spe- 
cies. It bears the name of self-educat- 
ing. To merit the name the automaton 
must first of all be capable of sear- 
ching. Having been trained in this 
faculty the automaton must be given 
a “memory” to enable it to accumula- 
te information in the process of se- 
arching. Next a system of prizes for 
successful ventures and of punishment 
for the unsuccessful ones should be 
devised. This method of self-education 
is termed the trial-and-error method. 
and it’s being used in some program- 
mes for solving educational prob- 
lems. 

Here’s an example of a programme 
for a self-educating computer. 

The computer was divided in two. 
One section played the part of the 
“pupil”, the other of several “shops” 
with varying goods assortment. The 
task of the “pupil” was to learn to 
find the necessary goods quickly. 


At first the “pupil” roamed the 
shops in search of the goods. In one 
shop he was in for success—he “came 
across” the goods. He “remembered” 
the “shop”—for this he was given a 
“prize”. 

The goods were changed. Out he 
went shopping again. New searches, 
followed by a new success, for which 
a prize was due. And, of course, a new 
“knot” in the “memory”. This was 
repeated over and over again. The 
training resulted in self-education of 
the ‘ pupil”. He unmistakingly chose 
the right shop for specific goods. 

Needless to say, automata capable 
of acting in this manner are rightly 


SELF-ADAPTING SYSTEM 269 


called “clever”, for they are very 
much like real live pupils. It is not 
without foundation that scientists call 
such mechanisms “brain-like”. 

It should, however, be kept in 
mind that research in this direction 
is actually just beginning. There is as 
yet no general theory of self-adapting 
systems. This field of research may 
be likened to a great field touched here 
and there by the plough of research. 
But should this field be properly 
cultivated, a generous crop will be 
the reward for the time and labour 
spent, a crop of all kinds of self-adapt- 
ing systems, true servants of man. 


270 SEMIOTICS 


A complex of scientific theories 
dealing with the properties 
of sign systems. 


Attention! Signs... . 


Here’s a rather odd complement, 
spoken language, 

symbolics of chemistry, 

street traffic signs, 

the “language” of the dolphins and 

bees, 

mathematical formulae, 

the Morse code, 

artificial computer “languages”. 

Enough for the present. What do 
you think such different concepts re- 
lating to quite different spheres of 
life have in common? All of them are 
examples of sign systems, they all 
are made up of signs. 

Well, what is a sign, what can be 
termed a sign? Everyone of you gave 
out a sign when you for the first time 
pronounced the word “mom”. And 
the signs used in games.... Or the 
familiar school bell. This is a sign to 
begin a lesson or a recess. And the 
important part signs played in the 
activities of underground organiza- 
tions! A curtain drawn in some pecu- 
liar manner, or a flower placed on a 
window-sill served as a warning. 

The “language” of animals, too, 
is a sign system. You, probably, 


had the chance to observe the diffe- 
rence in the sounds hens make. When 
a hen rallies her chicks it cackles. To 
warn of danger it cries out alarming- 
ly. Scientists distinguish about ten 
command signs in the “hen language.” 

Insects use specific signs to trans- 
mit various, often quite complex, in- 
formation. Ants, for instance, “speak.” 
the “language of odours”. And bees in 
their “monologues” resort to “dances”. 
With the aid of the “dance” the 
bee tells about the whereabouts of 
the sweet nectar, how to find the way 
to the hive and so on. 

Scientists are at present carefully 
studying the “language” of dolphins 

However, the distinction between 
these “languages” and the human lan- 
guage lies not only in poverty of 
means of expression, in the small 
number of available signs, but in 
quality, as well. For animals, as dis- 
tinct from man, the sign is always re- 
levant to actuality, its meaning is 
always concrete, it is valid only at 
the moment it is emitted. 

Various “finger languages” are also 
signs. A broken twig of a tree, smoke 
from the fire—all can serve as signs 
if there is an understanding as to 
their meaning: a warning, a landing 
sign for a plane, a meeting place. In 
general, as you have probably noti- 
ced, a sign is a symbolic signal with 
a definite meaning. The concept of a 
sign is very wide. But it always 
amounts to an object of substance, 
whether it is a happening, a pheno- 
menon or action. And always this 
object manifests itself in intercourse 
—concretely or symbolically. A sign 
(as you have also noticed) always ser- 
ves the purpose of storage, transmis- 
sion or processing of information. 


SEMIOTICS 271 


Signs are always part of a system. For instance, the identical sign “P” in the 


Latin ABC means the letter “P”; in the Russian ABC it corresponds to the letter 
“R”, and as a traffic sign it denotes a parking place. 

With the aid of sign systems people communicate with each other, such systems 
enable them to study nature, to work. 

Scientists divide the sign systems into two categories: natural and artificial. 

Animal “languages”, “odour languages”, “finger languages”, etc., are natural 
systems. The most advanced natural sound system is the human language. It’s 
a very fluid, flexible, well-developed system. Having been born out of communi- 
cation, the human language serves as a means of communication between peop- 
le. Our language helps us to express thoughts, wishes, to transmit the nuances of 
feelings. V. I. Lenin had a good reason to pronounce the language to he the 
main means of human communication. 

The higher mankind rises in its social progress the more new sign systems come 
into being. For this reason their number is continuously growing. And for the most 
part this is due to artificial sign systems. Mathematical and physical formulae, 
the symbolics of chemistry and traffic sign code mentioned above can all serve 
as examples of such systems. 

As arule the role of artificial systems is auxiliary: they express things that can 
be expressed with the aid of natural signs, but more concisely, precisely and eco- 
nomically. They at once reflect the ultimate result and the way that leads to it. 

Thus, if anyone would like to “translate” a familiar formula into words made 
up of ordinary letters, he would need several textbook pages to express the result 
of a simple mathematical calculation. 

Try and add the number one million seven hundred thirteen thousand five hun- 
dred and one to the number twelve million one thousand three hundred and nine- 
ty-nine, written down in words. It’s no easy job. 

And it’s so easy with the digits! 

4713 501 
+t 42001 399 
13 714 900 


There are “independent” artificial systems as well. Such systems in increasing 
use nowadays include first of all languages serving as intermediaries in computer 
translation and logical calculus. 

There exists also another subdivision of signs. They are classified as language 
and non-language signs. This classification is easy to perform. It, so to speak, 
lies on the surface. Evidently, all natural and artificial languages are language 
signs. Various schematic diagrams, blue-prints, drawings, signboards, maps, 
illustrations, diagrams, dances, pantomine, music, sculpture, etc., are non-lan- 
guage systems. 


Signs and sign systems are studied Obviously, signs attracted the at- 


by a special branch of science—semio- tention of scientists. Since signs ap- 
tics. It derives its name from the peared as soon as men began to think, 


word “semios”, the Greek for “sign”. their studies date very far back. Al- 


ate LANGUAGE 


LANGUAGES 


LAN [tance 


ARTIFICIAL 


ASS 


LANGUAGES 


NON- LANGUAGE 


The lesson 
begins 


Applause 


ready Aristotle and other Greek phi- 
losophers gave a thought to the gnos- 
tic value of signs. As man’s experien- 
ce extended and science thrusted dee- 
per into the secrets of nature, regula- 
rities common to various sign sys- 
tems became clearer. But primarily 
the ideas of semiotics won a place for 
themselves in the mathematical logic 
with its symbols and precise defini- 
tions. Here signs were more in evi- 
dence than in other branches of sci- 
ence. Achievements in this field are 
connected with the names of the Ger- 
man scientist G. Leibnitz and the 
English philosopher J. Locke. 
Next linguistics fell prey to semio- 
tic ideas. The need for communica- 
tion between people leads to the estab- 
lishment of a system of symbolic 
signs, maintains the French scientist 
F. de Saussure. He cited ceremonies, 
etiquette, war signals as examples. 
Among all systems he attributed the 
major importance to the language. 
The main principles of the science 
of semiotics were formulated by the 
American scientist Charles Peirce. In 
the thirties they were extended and 
developed by scientists from many 
countries belonging to many scientific 
schools. A leading place among them 
and the most important results belong 
to the Polish and Russian schools. 
Didn’t it appear to you that semio- 
tics tries to grasp what’s out of reach? 
That the field of interests which it is 
trying to “invade” is too wide? No, 
is the answer of the experts. Semiotics 
tries to tackle many fields of human 
knowledge but only from one point 
of view: different objects of research 
are studied unidirectionally, only from 


&lt;4 Classification of signs. 


SEMIOTICS 273 


the point of view of their value as 
signs serving to express some con- 
text. 

This is the reason for the exceptio- 
nally wide range of action of semio- 
tics. To support this claim let’s cite 
the proceedings of such an authorita- 
tive assembly as the first Soviet sym- 
posium on semiotics. It took place in 
December 1962 in Moscow. 

The scientists considered from “the 
semiotics point of view” diverse pro- 
blems, sometimes quite unexpected 
and strange for the layman. 

Of course, much attention was paid 
to the natural language in its capaci- 
ty as a sign system. 

The description of etiquette is of 
interest from the point of view of 
semiotics. It turns out that fortune 
telling with the aid of playing cards 
presents attractions to semiotics, for 
the reason that “this relatively simple 
semiotic system can be of interest to 
general semiotics”. Similarly, street 
traffic control “facilitates the estab- 
lishment of certain regularities com- 
mon to sign systems”. 

Climbing step by step the ladder 
of “establishing certain regularities”, 
semiotics reaches the heights of quite 
“unearthly” subjects. It provided the 
specialists with an intricate tool en- 
abling a language to be constructed 
for communication with civilizations 
of other planets. Yes, that’s right. 
On the Earth a special language has 
been developed for the intercourse 
with our “brothers in intellect”. Its 
author, the Dutch . scientist Hans 
Freudenthal, has given it the name 
“lincos”—langua cosmica, the cos- 
mic language. 


274 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Lincos is based on the unity of the 
laws in the Universe, specifically, on 
the unity of mathematical laws. It’s 
on the basis of these laws, which 
reflect the reality of the world, that 
Freudenthal builds his multi-stage 
lincos structure. This language has 
hierarchical organization, it contains 
an intricate system of relationships, 
complications, “advancement stages”. 

Obviously, appropriate means must 
be chosen for cosmic communica- 
tions—a radio signal or a light pulse. 
To begin with, primary mathemati- 
cal concepts should be coded with 
their aid: digits, equation signs, the 
essence of the binary system. Next 
a more advanced stage is reached: 
the exposition of the rules of arithme- 
tic. Then comes the turn of algebra, 
and so on, up to higher mathematics. 
Finally, with the aid of abstract ma- 
thematics Freudenthal turns to evalu- 
ating human behaviour, starts tell- 
ing the story about us, the inhabi- 
tants of the Earth, about our life, 
about the Earth—the home, where 
we were born. 

You may accuse semiotics of being 
a purely theoretical science, for even 


the creation of lincos does not dispell 
this view. It’s true, semiotics is a 
theoretical discipline, but it is still 
of some practical value. Think, for 
example, of the artificial sign systems 
—intermediary languages for cyber- 
netic machines. Moreover, semiotics, 
together with psychology and physio- 
logy, studies the location of speech 
centres. The results of these studies 
proved to be of undeniable practical 
value: the achievements of several 
Soviet scientists aided in the con- 
struction of a special language for 
deaf persons. This is an example of 
help given to medicine. 

Another example is from the field 

of pedagogics. 
. The pedagogues are paying an ever 
increasing attention to signs. This is 
not to be wondered at, since education 
entails, to a considerable degree, the 
mastery of signs. 

And those who are not convinced by 
the examples should not forget that 
it’s only recently that the marvellous 
faculties of semiotics began to be 
displayed. For this reason it’s natural 
to expect from this science new disco- 
veries and new successes in the future. 


275 


I An Automaton Decides upon a Mark 


TEACHING MACHINE Belgian urchins wrote in the testi- 


monial book of our pavilion at the 
Brussels World’s Fair: “Please, 
A machine build a machine which could help us 
not to study.” 
This wish will, certainly, never be 
knowledge and skills. fulfilled—no one’s going to build a 
machine which would help not to 
study. But a machine which helps to 
study has been built. 

Everybody has grown accustomed 
to the idea that whenever, wherever 
or whatever is being taught, the tea- 
ching is being done by man. Yet 
suddenly teaching has entered the 
realm of machines, and furthermore 
is being done perfectly well. 

What does a teacher do during a 
lesson? He discusses a topic. To this 
end he chooses appropriate material 
and compiles questions. Subsequent- 
ly he checks how the topic has been 
learned. 


The process of education can be 
represented by a system of interac- 
tion between the teacher and the pu- 
pil. The result of the operation of the 
system should be the acquisition of 
knowledge by the pupil. This system, 
though it might appear to be quite 
simple at first glance, is a very com- 
plicated one. Direct coupling and 
feedback are established between the 
teacher and the pupil. 

The direct coupling is represented 
by the channel through which the tea- 
cher transmits information over to 
you: lectures, laboratory work and 
practice. 


The feedback is the route from the 
pupil to the teacher. It is necessary 


to teach people 


276 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


for self-control, to help the pupil 
understand how he succeeded in mas- 
tering the subject. 

It so happens that the lesson, the 
common lesson at which you are pre- 
sent, is, as a rule, a process characte- 
rized by deficient feedback. The tea- 
cher sometimes doesn’t know how his 
pupils are mastering the subject. And 
without this knowledge he cannot or- 
ganize the educational process cor- 
rectly, in accordance with the situa- 
tion prevailing at the moment. 

It has already been established by 
experts that for the educational pro- 
cess to be effective it should provide 
for every pupil, say, in the course of 
a native language lesson, to receive 
up to 100 reinforcing influences in 
the 20 minutes that the teacher ex- 
plains his lesson. 

In a class of 30 the number of such 
influences from the teacher would 
have to be equal to 3000 in the same 
20 minutes. Thus, the teacher, like 
an automaton would have to exercise 
150 reinforcing influences per minute. 
This is practically impossible. 

What’s to be done under the cir- 
cumstances? The solution lies in the 
nature of the educational process. It 
is open to so-called programming, 
whereby an entire lesson or an ap- 
propriate paragraph from a textbook 
can be set out in detail together with 
precise instructions as to how and 
in what order the material is to be 
presented. Within such a detailed 
programme there is no difficulty in 
utilizing electronic computers to do 
the job of providing pupils with the 
information necessary to master cer- 
tain subjects and asking them ques- 
tions and assessing their knowledge 
on the spot. 

To understand the principles of ope- 


ration of educational machines let’s 
see how the simplest of them 
work. 

A tape with questions rotates in 
the machine together with blank pa- 
per for the answers. The pupil having 
answered a question must turn the 
handle. The answer moves under a 
transparent plate and can no longer be 
corrected. The correct answer, togeth- 
er with a new question, appears on 
the tape. 

And now let’s meet the electronic 
“Coach”. It helps in the study of fo- 
reign languages. The pupil presses a 
button and a phrase in a foreign lan- 
guage appears on the screen. One 
word from the phrase has been omit- 
ted, and it has to be found and inser- 
ted into the phrase. If the pupil ma- 
kes a mistake, the machine signals 
with a red lamp. This means that the 
button with the tempting word “Pro- 
mpting” should be pressed. But don’t 
place too much hope in it. You won’t 
get acrib. Actually, what the machine 
does isn’t straightforward prompting. 
You’ll be asked a leading question to 
help you remember the material you 
have been studying. 

A machine of the same type success- 
fully teaches, independent of teachers, 
all the mathematical operations that 
can be executed with a slide rule. 

The machines are provided with 
other buttons, as well. There may also 
be other luminous signs: “Correct”, 
“You’ve made a mistake”. If, for 
some reason, you have exceeded the 
time limit for the answer, the machine 
warns you politely “You think too 
long”. The machine “educator” can 
mark the answer, measure the time 
spent on its preparation, consult the 
academic record card and in some ca- 
ses ... send for a re-examination. 


Isn’t that a perfect examiner? The- 
te’s a machine that can check 1025 
examination papers, practically for all 
disciplines. 

The number of machines used for 
education is continuously growing. 
Isolated experiments are making way 
for wide application of educational 
machines. For several years now pro- 
grammed education has been practi- 
sed at hundreds of colleges and voca- 
tional schools. Over 1000 schools have 
specially equipped classes. There is 
every reason to suppose that in the 
future such machines will be emplo- 
yed universally. 


TEACHING MACHINE 277 


Well, and what’s going to happen 
to the teacher, to the man who does 
the teaching now? 

With the introduction of the most 
perfect automata his role will not 
abate, but, on the contrary, will grow 
in significance because of new duties. 
These duties will include the compi- 
lation of the programmes and their 
constant improvement. The teacher 
will, as before, play the most impor- 
tant part in the entire educational 
process, especially in fostering. And 
the machine will be his reliable edu- 
cational assistant. 


How does an educational machine operate? 


The pupil receives a paper. It consists of the theoretical part, followed by two 
examples in the form of problems, one solved, and one to be solved. As soon as 
the pupil solves his problem he sets the number of his paper and the answer on 
the switchboard and presses the button. The machine instantly answers with a 
“right” or a “wrong”. If the answer is correct, the pupil proceeds with the follo- 
wing paper. His task becomes more complicated with each successive paper. No 
paper can be learned unless all the preceding papers have been studied. 

See how many connections there are inside an educational machine? 

They all terminate in the control block. As soon as the pupil “introduces” his 
answer it is at once “attacked” by several devices of the educational machine. 
The comparison block compares the answer with the correct answer recorded 
in the “memory”. If the answer is correct, a signal is sent to the assessment block. 
If it is wrong, a signal is sent to the block which analyses wrong answers.'The in- 
formation output block will function only after the machine has thoroughly stu- 
died your answer. This is a strict and exacting “teacher”. 


Not one but several hundred types 
of teaching machines have already been 
built, some simple, others complex, 
among them midget “examiner-tea- 
chers” the size of a cigarette case and 
large machines occupying whole rooms, 
The teaching machines are subdivi- 
ded into groups in accordance with 
their purpose. 

The first group is made up of simple 
mechanized devices. 


The second group embraces train- 
ing machines. 

The third—testing and teaching ma- 
chines. Among this group the majority 
is made up of examining machines 
used to test the knowledge of the stu- 
dents. The most widely used is “The 
Swallow”. 

As a trule, their names speak for 
themselves: “The Lecturer”, “The Con- 
sultant”, “The Trainer”, “The Coach”, 


Information output Knowledge evaluation 


: (bees block block 
o AWW SS 


ON ABN =] 


STUDE NT 


“*Memory’' block 
Control block education program 
(commutator) me! and correct an- 
swers 


Answer input block 


Analysis-of wrong 


Comparison block 
answers block 


Prograrnme block 


WORK STARTS 


Test question 2 


Leading question 
fe e| 21 


, 


WORK ENDS 


“The Tester”, “The Examiner”. There 
are universal “machine educators”, 
as well: they test, consult and exami- 
ne. 
The fourth group of educational de- 
vices is the most complicated of them 
all. It consists of classes for program- 
med education. _ 

Let’s learn about one of them, “The 
Accord”. It has nothing to do with 
music. The name is made up of ini- 
tial letters of its Russian designation 
meaning an “automated class for 
controlled education with ramified 
dosage”. Let’s enter it. 

There are thirty tables. On each 
table there is a small control panel 
with lamps and levers. The big cont- 
rol panel of the teacher is connected 
to the small panels. 

Every student has a chapter from 
the “educational programme” in front 
of him which he must learn. The chap- 
ter ends with questions. When the 
student thinks he has learned his 
lesson he operates an appropriate 
switch. 

If the answer is correct, the signal 
“continue” will light up, if not—“re- 
peat”. 

Now, note the following. There are, 
as usual, thirty students to a class, 
and there is, as before, one teacher to 
teach them. The educational process 
is, no doubt, collective: and, at the 
same time, individual. Here the stu- 
dents are not “reduced to the ave- 
rage”. 

There is a single programme, but 
everyone can learn it in his own way 
adapting it to suit his nature. A ca- 
pable student will make quick work 


TEACHING MACHINE 279 


of the material and proceed further. 
The weak student, on the other hand, 
will be able to work slowly, not get- 
ting nervous and not trying his ut- 
most to catch up with the class. In 
this way the principal doctrine of the 
old “unprogrammed” educational the- 
ory, that had been very difficult to 
put into practice, is realized: the doc- 
trine of individual approach to every 
student. 

Programmed education that will 
have to absorb the best achievements 
of our educational system will not 
only make life easier for the student, 
but for the teacher-programmist, as 
well. The teacher-programmist will be 
able to transmit the knowledge of his 
subject to any group of students irres- 
pective of their level of knowledge 
and of intellectual development. By 
placing accent on individual work 
the teacher makes every student not 
only study, but learn, as well. 

Much has been done in this country 
to develop the new educational me- 
thod. 

Special educational programmes are 
being compiled, the efficiency of va- 
rious methods of programming is being 
studied, models of the educational 
process based on the theory of proba- 
bility and methods of controlling this 
process are being designed, the search 
is on for a universal educational 
algorithm (i.e. rules). 

However, scientists and educatio- 
nalists endeavour to look farther ahe- 
ad. They would like to build educa- 
tional complexes and compile educa- 
tional programmes that would take 
into account the individual propensi- 


A block diagram of the educational machine “The Coach” and the route of education process 


from the start to the end of its work. 


280 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


ties of students as well. The new me- 
thods are being applied in specialized 
education: in sports, in music, in 
medicine. 

To teach the blind and deaf a me- 
thod of reading hand-written texts 
as they are written is being developed 
and tested experimentally. Such a 
machine will be able to correet dicta- 
tions as they are written. 

A design of a machine capable of 
talking and understanding human lan- 
guage has been developed. Such a 
machine will be able to teach hund- 
reds, and in the foreseeable future 
thousands, of students. To teach va- 
rious subjects and with an individual 
programme for every student. The 
machine will read what the student 
has written, hear him speak, in short 
will react to everything the student 
does in the process of education, and 
this without any control panels, le- 
vers or push-buttons! 

The problem of employing big elec- 
tronic computers in mass education is 
being considered, too. 

Even the use of electronic teaching 
machines in flats is envisaged. They 
will be connected to the state educa- 
tional machine network. In fact, two 
or three electronic machines can al- 
most simultaneously provide educa- 
tional information for hundreds, or 


even thousands, of consumers. This 
will enable permanent controlled edu- 
cation to be conducted from class 
work to home work. This may be sup- 
plemented by an educational tele- 
vision network. 

Recently Soviet scientist O. Belo- 
tserkovsky read before an interna- 
tional conference an interesting paper 
with the title “The Effect of Space 
Research on the Development of Ge- 
neral and Specialized Education”. The 
paper dealt with the employment of 
communications satellites equipped 
with transmitters to transmit educa- 
tional radio-television programmes to 
wide expanses of the Earth. 

The scientist envisages the time 
when powerful television transmitters 
of the Earth’s satellites “hanging sta- 
tionary” at a height of over 30 thou- 
sand kilometres will start a new school 
year in the vast school, the desks of 
which will be strewn over not only 
towns and villages, but over the bo- 
undless expanses of jungle and pla- 
teau, over islands lost in the ocean 
and over the oases of the deserts. In 
this way a wide coverage of various 
sections of the world’s population 
from the little ones to the grown- 
ups could be achieved. This, too, 
would, of course, increase the effici- 
ency of education. 


" Didn‘t | say the street will spoil him,” 


TRANSLATION, COMPUTER 


281 


Translation from one language 
natural or artificial) 

into another language 

(natural ov artificial) 

with the aid 

of electronic computers. 


“The Horse [Called| Charley” 


On January 7, 1954 in New York 
the first public demonstration of an 
electronic computer in its novel qua- 
lity—that of a translator—took pla- 
ce. The computer translated Russian 
phrases into English. In all, 60 sen- 
tences were translated. 

The computer translated. It did the 
job like a man ignorant of the langua- 
ge: with the aid of a dictionary. Man 
finds unambiguous words and arran- 
ges them into a sentence according 
to the rules of grammar. Needless to 
say, such a translation is far from 
perfect, yet, it caused great difficul- 
ties to the computer. The first diffi- 
culty can be defined as technical. 
Judge for yourselves: the special pro- 
gramme containing rules for the trans- 
lation consisted of 2500 instructions, 
which is much more than for solving 
complex mathematical problems. 

There was, too, another side to the 
technical difficulty. The computer 
could read 4 800 000 letters per minute, 
but to provide it with a corresponding 
number of punch-cards 12 thousand 
typists working at a speed of 10 thou- 
sand signs per hour would be needed. 


Even if magnetic tape was used ins- 
tead of the punch-cards, this would 
require a huge number of dictators. 
Moreover, it would take, literally, an 
army of editors to read and edit the 
text. 


Aren’t those difficulties formidable? 
You bet! Yet, those are not the most 
serious. The main difficulty lies in 
the large volume of the vocabularies 
of modern languages. This leads to 
inaccuracies in translations from one 
language into another. An elucidat- 
ing experiment of French linguists, 
who tried to assess the degree of pre- 
cision attainable in translation from 
one language into another, brought 
the result that reminds one of the 
faulty telephone game. Fourteen expe- 
rienced translators took their seats 
at a round table so that each knew 
the language of his right neighbour. 
The first translator—a German—wrote 
on a piece of paper: “The art of brew- 
ing is as old as the history of man- 
kind”, and handed the piece to his 
left neighbour. The latter translated 
the text from the German into his 
native Spanish, wrote it down and 
in his turn handed it over to his left 
neighbour. The sentence went on its 
way round the table, everybody trans- 
lating it into his native language. At 
last it returned to the German in 
Hungarian. He translated it and read 
with surprise: “From ancient times 
beer has been the favourite drink of 
mankind.” 


Idioms present great obstacles to 
computers. The English words “char- 
ley horse” the computer will translate 
as “horse [called] Charley”, when 
actually it means a “cramp in the 
calf of a leg”. “Foolproof”—“proof 


282 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


against adverse influences”— translated 
literally means “proof against fools”. 

The French phrase “absorption com- 
fortable des vibrations”—“a comfor- 
table absorption of vibrations”—real- 
ly means “the attenuation of vibra- 
tions to achieve a comfortable ride”. 
“Dos d’aénes”—“elevated road irre- 
gularities”—is literally translated as 
“donkey backs”. “Coups de roquet- 
tes”— “vibrations in the vertical pla- 
ne”—means literally “rocket firings”. 

If the computer stumbles over phra- 
ses, what will it do with a text like 
the end of N. Gogol’s story “The 
Nose”? “But, however, everything 
considered, though this, and that, 
and the other can, of course, be assu- 
med, perhaps, even ... well then, can 
inconsistencies be avoided anywhere? 
Still, however, to meditate upon it, 
there is really something in it all. 
No matter who would say, and what 
he would say to the contrary, such 
happenings do come about in the 
world: rarely, but, still, they do.” 

It’s too early yet for computers to 
take on sophisticated texts. What a 
lot of mistakes they make even with 
the simplest translations! Once com- 
puter mistook “one” for “two”. And, 


instead of “two” gave out “ones”. 
The electronic computer has made a 
mistake that would make even a 
mediocre pupil blush. In the course 
of a grammatical analysis of the sen- 
tence “The general’s daughter was 
reading a book” the computer classi- 
fied the word “general’s” as a verb, 
not forgetting to mention its tense. 
The incident occurred because the 
computer “saw” a widespread verb 
ending in the combination of sounds 
which made up the noun. 

An interesting incident occurred 
when a computer was translating an 
article from the English newspaper 
The Times dealing with computorized 
translation. The computer came upon 
the words “the iron curtain”. It 
“stopped to think”, and then having 
omitted this incomprehensible term 
went on with the translation. 

Here’s another incident. An Ame- 
rican computer, while translating the 
title of the paper by the Academician 
S. Vernov “To Know the Secrets of 
Outer Space” has distorted it beyond 
recognition: “Let’s Open the Secret 
Outer Space.” 

And still the computer translates. 
Let’s see how it is being done. 


Let’s follow the stages of computer translation. To begin with, a reel is inser- 


ted into the computer with tape carrying the English text. The inscription is, 
however, not in signs but in perforations, as in punch-cards. This is the code of 
the text being translated. Placed next to this reel is a reel with narrow magnetic 
tape carrying the computer programme for translation operation. The computer 
“memory” stores in its cells Russian words arranged in strict order next to cor- 


responding English words. 


The computer translator, like man, makes use of the dictionary. The only dif- 
ference is that in its dictionary words are “written” not in signs but in digits. 
The English “a” became 16, “b”—06, “w”—13, “m”—11, “n”—15, “x”—09, 
etc. Russian letters, too, became numbers: “a”—16, “6”—06, “s”—13, “m”—11, 


“H”—15, etc. 


The technology of computer translation. » 


The operator at the letter keyboard 
automatically substitutes numbers 
for letters (see Table 1), for instan- 
ce A—16, M—11 


1 Table of English 
letter codes 


Punched tape with numbers is 
fed into the computer 


2 The English part 
of the dictionary 
Leff column Right column 


16226121508-I200 256325: 


Cacenees ‘o 


1205 210010 .... 0404... 


Translation programme is switched on 


Subtract the codes of the words of the if 
left column of the dictionary from. reste 20.2258 
the codes of the words, in turn, aig) — 4 i 
until the remainder is O. When this (2)1100.256:3254 21001I....0404 3 The meaning of 
is done, put the code of the right co-[4 the right-column codes 
lumn (for its meaning see Table 3)in. 
place of the word in the memory device 0) 

sili, Number in the Rus- 


ARNING! The third word hasn't — | sully, N 1 
been found in the dictionary iT hUS Pines ven eet ot the dic- 
Cede aban econ manda owe] Te ater 
it end on’’s'’? No! Does it endon”e"? 100110.0404 — j21100...4121 ed stages c Laue 


No! Does it end on ‘‘ing’’? Yes! i . fied word 
Delete the ending and look up the. [Dictionary ] 
dictionary again. Is there an *’e’'? 


Yes. Is there an “‘is’’ in front? Yes. 


Nouns 
Feminine gender 


It’s clear: this is a verb in the pre+ 
sent continuous tense.'It,is transla! 
ted as present. T he verb “is“is not 
translated (there is nothing in its 
place) 


of the dictionary! 


Mig 
53254 S— 1609121516 
Ani 


256— 2408070813283012 


Arrange the words according to the 
right-column codes in‘compliance with 
the rules of the Russian language 

Subtract ‘‘Russian’’ word numbers in 
turn from the left-column codes of the 
dictionary 5 until the remainder is 0. 
When this is done, place the right-co- 
lumn code (for its meaning see Table © 
6), in the memory device 
The codes are transmitted to the auto- 


matic printer which prints the Rissian 
text 


Late Table of Russian 
letter codes 


B- O5}K-19/N- 24 
B-13]N-27|P-07 
[-10/M-# 1h ¢ -05 


284 


CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


It’s written here: 


Shis is not 


Necessaey 


These pieces of tape have been taken out of the computer after translation. Here is the literal 
translation: “Oto He HeoOxozuMo.” 


The translation starts with the computer searching in the dictionary for the 
words recorded on the tape. The computer has found a word. Hasn't it made a 
mistake? How could this be checked? The arithmetical device will subtract from 
every word-number found in the dictionary the word-number recorded on the 
punch-tape. If the remainder is zero, the word has been found correctly. Such 
comparison takes about one ten thousandth of a second. The computer can look 
through a dictionary of a thousand words in less than a second. 

Next the computer turns its attention to the index number of the English word 
found in the dictionary. The corresponding Russian word bears the same number 
in the dictionary. And this word, too, is written in digits. If we now translate the- 
se numbers into corresponding Russian letters, we will get the Russian word—a 
translation of the English word introduced into the computer. The words have 
been translated, but the computer cannot, as yet, construct a Russian phrase. 
First it has to analyse the grammatical form of the English and the Russian words: 
the gender, the number, the case, the declination, etc. In the computer these cha- 
racteristics, too, have the appearance of numbers and are stored in the “memory”. 
Word parts such as suffixes, endings, prepositions and articles of the English words 
have been translated into the language of the so-called digital information that 
is acceptable to the computer. 

Only now does the computer start analysing the English phrase as a whole. 
Subsequently it constructs the Russian phrase. This is done on the basis of the 
translation programme which contains the paragraphs: “verbs”, “nouns”, “ad- 
jectives”, “numerals”, “syntax”, “changes in the word order”. The computer 
constructs the Russian phrases from the words translated from the English in com- 
pliance with the rules of the Russian grammar. 


The computer translator, as you 
already know, has made its appearan- 
ce in 1954. Up to 1958 there were 
only three electronic computers adap- 
ted for translation of technical texts 
in the whole world: the Soviet, the 
American and the English. The most 
advanced—the Soviet—had a word re- 
serve of 952 English and 1973 Rus- 


TRANSLATION, COMPUTER 285 


of an electron in 
an electron mic- 
roscope we resopt 
to differencial 
equations... 


MH 3HaTb Oyyy- 
mun nyTs lOuute- 
pa B HeOecax mm 
IlyTb aeCKTpOHa B 
aICKTPOHHOM MHK- 
pockone, MH upH- 
Geraem K gudhe- 
peHIwasbHEIM 

ypaBHeHHAM... 


sian words. 


Here’s an example of translation 
made by the computer in the form 
it was produced without editing: 


When a prac- 
tival problem in 
. science and tech- 
nology formula- 
tion, the chances 
are rathner goud 
that it leads to 
one on more dif- 
ferencial equati- 
ons. This is true 
certenly of the 
vast category of 
problems associa- 
ted with force and 
motion, so that 
whether we want 
to know the hea- 
vens or the path 


Ecaua wmpaktu- 
weckad 3ayaqa B 
Hayke WIM TexHu- 
Ke JOlycKaeT Ma- 
TeMATH4IeCKY!I0 
opMymposKy, 
WaHchl j{OBOIbHO 
BeIMKM, 4TO 9TO 
IIpWBOMUT K Of{HO- 
My Huu Oosee nup- 
depeHnwasIbHEIM 
ypabHeHuaM. 9TO 
BepHo Oe3ycOBHO 
1A OOMIMpHOu Ka- 
Teropua 3ayaq, 
CBA3aHHEIX C CHOU 
WI j{BMKeHHeM, 
Tak 4TO, XOTHM Iu 


OO 


aS cS 


@)) 
\ 


Later another Soviet electronic com- 
puter, “The Arrow”, made a transla- 
tion from the French into the Russian. 
Seventeen programmes containing 
8500 instructions were compiled for 
this purpose. The computer translated 
the text by separate phrases. Even 
for a phrase of from 8 to 10 words the 
computer had to make’45-50 thousand 
cycles. True, this took only 20-25 se- 
conds. 

Recently a specialized English jour- 
nal carried an article on computers 
that have from 1963 onwards been 
translating into English Russian tech- 
nical texts in the field of aviation at a 
rate of 100 thousand words per day. 
Presently translation speeds of up to 
a million words per day have been 
achieved. All this suggests that com- 
puter translation will in due time, 
probably, become practical. 


Intertreter: " He transmits Martian greetings!" 


U 


UNIVERSAL ELECTRONIC 
DIGITAL COMPUTER 


A computer 

based on electronic devices 

and controlled by programmes. 
It is capable of performing 

a definite number of operations 
per unit time with quantities 
expressed in numbers, 


Calculation with Lightning Speed 


Most of you can’t, presumably, even 
imagine what myriads of numbers sur- 
round the modern man. It wouldn’t 
be an exaggeration to compare the 
number of arithmetic operations per- 
formed per month all over the world 
with the number of drops contained 
in the sea or stars in the Galaxy. 

A hundred years ago relatively 
small groups of people handled all the 
calculations. Nowadays all sorts of 
professions—scientists, designers and 
engineers—are engaged in calculations, 
not to speak of accountants, book- 
keepers and cashiers, who spend their 
whole lives struggling with numbers. 
Incidentally, nearly all calculations 
are made with the aid of various cal- 
culating machines. Without such ma- 
chines, using only paper and pencil, 
one half of the population of the world 
couldn’t perform all the calculations 
needed for the other half employed 
in productive work. 

Without calculating machines nor- 
mal life of modern society and conti- 
nued progress in science and technolo- 
gy would be impossible. 


But even with the aid of mechani- 
cal, non-electronic calculating ma- 
chines people nowadays are no longer 
able to deal with extremely complica- 
ted problems posed by modern life. 

This led to the appearance some 
twenty years ago in several countries 
of electronic computers which took 
over the struggle against numbers. 

Having focused in itself the achie- 
vements of physics, radio-electronics 
and production technology of electro- 
nic and magnetic elements, the elec- 


UNIVERSAL ELECTRONIC DIGITAL COMPUTER 287 


tronic computer became the most po- 
werful and the most flexible calcula- 
ting instrument ever to be built by 
man. A high-speed computer can per- 
form over a million operations per 
second. 

Calculations made with lightning 
speed. Yes, that’s right, electronic 
computers do deal instantly with a 
flood of numbers. In one second the 
computer performs many times the 
number of operations performed by an 
experienced calculator with an arith- 
mometer in eight hours. In the time 
of several hours the computer makes 
as many calculations as a good mathe- 
matician is unable to make in his 
lifetime. 

Unbelievably high speed of count 
is only one of the extraordinary pro- 
perties of the marvellous machine, 
which can extract roots, integrate and 
solve the simplest algebraic equations 
as well as most complex differential 
equations. 

Now the electronic automaton can 
cope with everything. The machine 


successfully enters fields which until 
quite recently were considered to be 
the exclusive privilege of man. Ma- 
chine tools, shops and factories are 
controlled by computers. Computer 
control of production processes ap- 
preciably increases the productivity 
of labour and makes work easier for 
the worker. 

And the control of factory econo- 
mics? The computer “economist” 
took over from man many functions 
of planning and analysing various 
economic parameters. Here, too, ad- 
vantages are obvious: the control be- 
comes more operative, the number of 
people employed in the control sphere 
decreases. 

The fields of application of the elec- 
tronic computer are much wider. There 
are computers that do the work of des- 
igners, translators, teachers, meteorolo- 
gists. How do these electronic craftsmen 
work? The chapters of our encyclopae- 
dia tell you about it, as well as about 
the principle of operation of the elec- 
tronic digital computer. 


Numbers enter the computer by way of the coding device. Here numbers and 


instructions undergo transformations and assume the form suitable for computer 
operations. Next they are fed into the input device and into the working memory 


store. 


Some of the numbers remain here for the time being inactive. For the others 
the working store plays the part of a transit station. Through it some numbers 
reach the permanent “memory”, a sort of computer’s “notebook”. Numbers are 
stored here by millions, the time of storage being unlimited. 

Other numbers are needed for immediate processing. They are instantly fed 
into the arithmetic unit, consisting of adders, multiplication, division and sub- 
traction circuits. The latter perform all arithmetical operations with the aid of 


addition. 


In addition to permanent, long-time “memory” the electronic computer pos- 
sesses a working “memory” as well. This is needed to record data frequently used 


in the course of work. 


The capacity of the working “memory” is not large, but it hands out numbers 


quickly at short notice. 


PPPPDIY) 
PPE PLDI 
XPD IK DD 
SSP 
EXP X DXDT] Permanent ‘ § memory” 
PREP PD&lt; 


Working § * memory”? 


ame 


Si s iii : 
Encoding numbers Output and printing 
and instructions devices 


UNIVERSAL ELECTRONIC DIGITAL COMPUTER 289 


Input numbers and 
instructions 


Machine ‘‘memory’’ 


Ba betnpebted pong 
22 = aah 


Man and machine carry out calculations in almost the same manner. The arrows show the paths 
of control signals. 


The ultimate results of the calculations—the finished product of the computer— 
enter the output block and are typed on paper tape or on blanks of a specified form. 

The arrows in the drawing show the general path of numbers and instructions 
in the computer. Red arrows indicate the path of numbers, white—the path of 
instructions. 

If we looked, from a great height, at thousands of trains running in different 
directions along steel tracks we would perceive asimilar picture. The motion of the 
trains, disorderly at first glance, is governed by a single plan, a single timetable. 


Block-diagram of a high-speed electronic computer. Red arrows denote the routes of digits, 
white ones—the routes of instructions. 


19—616 


290 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The computer works in separate cycles. Look at the control block. Out of all 
the computer parts it is, of course, the most important, for it is due to this block 
that automatic operation of the calculating blocks is possible. 

The control block in the drawing has ingoing and outgoing blue lines of instruc- 
tions. During each cycle of computer operation an instruction from the working 
“memory” is transmitted to the control block. It is recorded here and carried out 
during the next cycle. A special counter counts the instructions after they have 
been carried out. 

The process is repetitive: choice of an instruction—execution; choice of an in- 
struction—execution. The execution of the prescribed computer programme con- 
sists of a great number of such repetitions, each of which, in short, makes up one 
automatic cycle (4—the choice of an instruction from the programme, 2—the exe- 
cution of the instruction). 

All the highways in the computer pass through the working “memory” store. This 
is understandable, for it is the receiver of the calculating process programme fed 
from punch-tape or punch-cards. 


The working of a universal electro here. However, now you have some 
nic computer is, of course, much more idea of the basic principles invol- 
sophisticated than has been shown ved. 


291 


V 


VIDEO DISPLAY 


Devices 

used with the computer 
for the input of data 
presented ‘in visual form 
and the output 

of data in visual form. 


Open, Sesame! 


Before we begin the story of the 
brand-new methods of effecting the 
output of information from electronic 
computers the reader should be made 
familiar with the problem of introdu- 
cing data into the computer. The pro- 
cesses are closely interrelated. 

Many machine-tool designers are 
confronted with the problems of effec- 
ting input to the machine: how best 
to feed workpieces or raw materials. 
And for the designers of electronic 
computers this problem assumes great 
proportions. 

A computer may be utilized only if 
it is able to exchange information 
with man, with the outside world. 
Until the electronic computer receives 
input data and a programme of opera- 
tions it remains speechless and 
thoughtless. Hence, to start working 
in collaboration with the computer 
man must provide an entry to it and 
must make himself understood. This 
is no easy task and it is made no ea- 
sier by comparisons involving the 
opening of the door of a furnace to 
throw coal into it or the filling of a 
mill with grain to be milled by mill 
stones into flour. 

The computer input, as we have 
said before, serves to enable man to 
cooperate with the computer and thus 
to make the work of both man and 
computer efficient. It may be said 
simply that in each approach to the 
computer man poses problems for the 
computer to answer. It is, however, 
a fact that man and computer speak 
different languages. Therefore, before 
you fill the computer with “grain”, 
you must make it “understand” what 


292 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


sort of grain it is. And, secondly, it 
should know what to do with it. 

When man begins working with the 
machine he provides initial data in 
the form, wholesome for the machine 
and instructs the machine to carry 
out specific actions. The machine 
reads the data, processes them, records 
the results obtained and transmits 
them. to man in a form understan- 
dable to him. 

- Previously man transmitted the in- 
formation to computers with the aid 
of keyboard devices, this is still be- 
ing done. The underlying principle 
has long been: used in printing for 
setting the types of newspapers, ma- 
gazines and books. 

Imagine a standard printing ma- 
chine which transforms symbols shown 
on the keyboard into a definite sequen- 
ce of pulses and intervals between 
them: You press one key after another, 
and pulses corresponding to the in- 
formation enter the machine. 

But. you won’t be quick in introdu- 
cing a mass of data into the computer 
manually, “by the fingertips”. Even 
a typist of the highest grade cannot 
type more. than six signs per second. 
The electronic computer, on the other 
hand, handles several million bits 
per second. 

To make this discrepancy more evi- 
dent imagine the operating speed of 
the computer to be a million times 
less. Our slow computer will operate 
at speeds convenient to man—one 
operation per second. The correspon- 
ding speed of the keyboard printing 
device will in this case amount to one 
sign per day! 

The operator awaiting an answer 
from the computer could in these cir- 
cumstances be compared to a man 
receiving a telegram ata rate of one 


letter-sign per day. Naturally,. such 
speeds of information output are un- 
acceptable. 

What’s the solution to this prob- 
lem? How could the disparity between 
the capabilities of man and computer 
speed be avoided? 

Special high-speed input-output 
complexes have been designed for 
computers. Usually, they consist of 
punch-card reading devices, several 
magnetic-tape data accumulators, a tele- 
type and a high-speed printing device. 

As you know, the punch-card rea- 
ding device introduces into the com- 
puter information contained in per- 
forations of the punch cards. The 
magnetic-tape memory devices—accu- 
mulators—enable the intermediate re- 
sults of computer operations to be 
stored. They can also serve as long- 
time information store. The teletype 
is used for short messages, for in- 
stance to transmit an instruction to 
the operator to install a definite mag- 
netic-tape bobbin. The operator, too, 
uses the teletype to send a signal to 
begin calculations. The printing de- 
vice is used for the output of the results. 

Modern input-output devices ope- 
rate at the highest possible speeds. 
They “swallow up” some 1000 punch 
cards per minute and hand out data 
quicker than man can read them. 

And even the teletype, this appa- 
rently most sluggish block of the com- 
puter, types much quicker and much 
more accurately than a qualified typist. 

However, even these high-speed im- 
plements do not enable the possibili- 
ties of the reading devices of modern 
computers to be fully utilized. 

Suppose you would like to feed into 
the computer not numbers or letters, 
but prints, diagrams, graphs, draw- 
ings? What would you do? 


Previously, the user of the computer 
recoded all the graphical information 
into numerical coordinates himself 
and only then transmitted them to 
the computer. Now the computer has 
been taught to accept and hand out 
graphical information in the form to 
which man is accustomed. This 
substantially speeded up the “exchan- 
ge processes” between man and ma- 
chine. Formerly it took fifteen minu- 
tes for a teletype to print the coordi- 
nates of a thousand points of a straight 
line. The screen of a video display 
depicts a straight line in a milli- 
second, or two! 

Visual images are introduced into 
the computer with the aid of a combi- 
nation of photocells and an electron- 
beam tube. Each photocell is so ar- 
ranged as to receive light only from 
a definite point of the screen. The 
computer identifies the image dis- 
played on the screen by the pattern 
of signals from the photocells. ~ 

A combination of a pen and a pho- 
tocell enabled the so-called “luminous 
pen” to be designed. This is a small 
hollow cylinder housing a photocell. 
This pen is used for the input of draw- 
ings, prints, diagrams drawn by hand 
on a screen resembling the screen of 
a television set. 

Some 50 years ago the electron- 
beam tube was a rarity. Now it’s a 
permanent resident of practically eve- 
ry home in town and country. The tu- 


bes live in our television sets, and it’s 


their screens we watch. 

Of course, the sphere of application 
ofthe electron-beam tube is not li- 
mited to domestic use, its range of 
action is exceptionally wide and ma- 
nifold. Suffice it to name, besides. tele- 
vision’ ‘sets, measuring instruments, 
radar, computers, radio, automatics, 


VIDEO DISPLAY 293 


X-ray instruments, electron micro- 
scopy—this “electron device utilizing 
one or several electron beams” works 
everywhere. 

Nowadays there is a whole family of 
electron-beam tubes, consisting of ne- 
ar as well as distant relatives. 

Let’s trace the line of kinship of 
interest to us in this family. 

Take the familiar electron-beam tu- 
be of the television receiver. This is 
a tube that draws pictures. The other 
name for it is the kinescope. It bu- 
ilds up an image by varying the elec- 
tron beam. 

If.a highly focused electron beam—a 
beam incident in one point—is di- 
rected onto a screen covered with a 
luminous compound and made to move 
across the surface of the screen with 
the aid of an electric or magnetic 
field, this will make an oscillograph. 
It has found wide application in the 
technique of measurements. 

And now we'll try to build into the 
tube several plates, standing in the 
way of the electron beam, and con- 
nect them to a system of signalling 
or control. 

Next we’ll make the beam run in 
several directions: from the cathode 
to different plates, whereby the elec- 
trical circuit between them will be 
alternately connected and disconnec- 
ted. This will make a quite different 
electronic device—the electron-beam 
commutator. 

Now let’s place another obstacle in 
the way of the electron beam: a plate 
with letters inscribed on it, the let- 
ters being impervious to electrons. 
This time we again have a new devi- 
ce—an electron-beam writing tube. 
This is the tube that bears the name of 
charactron,: the luminous pen. 


294 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


»” 


Charactron—the luminous “fountain pen”. 
1—cathode and focusing cylinder 
2—choosing plates 

3—code matrix 

4—addressing deflection plates 
5—card-forming plates 


Since our interest is focused on the charactron, let's get down to detail. 


In the charactron a metal plate (called the matrix) with a set of letters, num- 
bers or any other signs (called the stencils) is placed in the way of the electron 
beam. To be able to record the signs-stencils on its screen the tube must also con- 
tain some other important parts—systems for the formation, collimation and 
‘deflection of the electron beam. In the charactron those systems are: the electron 
projector (“the électron source”), the system for the selection of signs on the ma- 
trix, and the address system. 


VIDEO DISPLAY 295 


The projector reflects on the cathode the image of all the signs contained in the 
matrix. However, not all the signs are needed at the same time. So the selection 
system goes into operation. It selects the appropriate stencil and takes it through 
the diaphragm. 

However, having passed through the diaphragm the sign without the aid of 
the address system would “hang in the air”, would not be able to find its place 
on the screen. The address system, so to speak, “takes the sign by the hand” and 
leads it to the place reserved for it on the screen. 

After that the image on the screen disappears, and a new inscription appears. 
It is, however, possible to make the image stay on the screen for some time; in this 
case it is possible to read it or photograph it with the aid of a high-speed camera. 
Here all depends on the designation of the charactron. The time within which the 
signs disappear—the scientists call it the time of residual illumination—may be 
short—some 10-20 microseconds (ps) or long—5-10 s. 

The signs on the charactron are usually quite small—2-5 mm. But when the 
need arises they can be enlarged. To this end some devices are equipped with a 
special electron lense, which with the aid of the electric field can enlarge the signs. 

The screen of the electron recording tube is generally large, its diagonal being 
from 15 to 75 cm long. The density of signs on the surface of the screen is fairly 
high—the screen accommodates up to 16 thousand letters or numbers. The writ- 


ing speed of the “luminous pen” reaches 4 thousand signs per second. 


The charactrons are widely used in 
electronic computers, mainly for data 
output. It’s very convenient to ob- 
tain the results of the “computer’s 
labours” quickly and in a visible form. 
Such a charactron does the work of an 
output printing device. Its data selec- 
tion speed of 25 thousand signs per 
second (for information in the form of 
letters or numbers) is a convincing 
proof of its quality. 

“What’s the good of it?” you would 
ask. 

In less than a wink all those 25 
thousand signs will disappear to make 
place for the next 25 thousand. And 
so every second. What’s to be done 
with them? That’s easy—you just 
have to resort to a high-speed cine- 
camera. It will photograph the image 
displayed on a film and thus “preser- 
ve” it. These “information preser- 
ves”—letters and numbers—can be 


stored during the time needed to pro- 
cess all the data received. 

The use of advanced electronic in- 
put and output in place of electrome- 
chanical devices for the communica- 
tions between man and machine brought 
about a thousand-fold increase in 
computer input speeds. Now it has 
become possible to erase immediately, 
as one would wipe off a speck of dust, 
an unneeded record or an error, to 
introduce easily and quickly the ne- 
cessary data corrections. The “lumi- 
nous pen” may even be used to con- 
trol the computer: to this end the 
word or code of an instruction or an 
appropriate image should be written 
on the screen. 

The new devices possess all the ad- 
vantages: they are fast, noiseless, re- 
liable, universal, provide for an in- 
stant, direct and complete access to 
information stored in the computer. 


296 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The operations may be conducted on 
a real time scale: the computer need 
not wait for man, and man need not 
wait for the computer. 

The charactron is also used in some 
control systems. In these cases it 
is usually connected to a_ kines- 
cope. 

In such a charactron-kinescope sys- 
tem the kinescope screen produces the 
image of the object, and the charac- 
tron screen the “substantialized” signs 
in the form of cards. These serve as 
a kind of notes. For example, while 
the kinescope screen shows some ob- 
ject, the charactron screen shows its 


card with the symbolic number, type 
and the nomenclature of the group to 
which it belongs. 

The charactron was developed in 
1941. In electronic computers it was 
employed later—in 1953—after many 
improvements were made. It won ac- 
ceptance because of its positive quali- 
ties, valuable “traits of character”, 
among which the specialists unani- 
mously acclaim the excellent image 
quality, the visibility of information, 
the high speed of data selection. It 
is these qualities that make charac- 
tron one of the principal means of 
“information representation”. 


297 


W 


WORD 


A set of symbols 
designed to represent . 
parts of a message 
transmitted 


through communications channels, 


Only Dots in Every Line .. 


There’s a game called “Hot-Cold”. 
In this game all the words, all the 
commands boil down just to two sym- 
bols. When you go away from the 
object of your search, it’s “cold”, 
when you come nearer, it’s “hot”. 

Guided by these symbolic signs peo- 
ple taking part in the game someti- 
mes solve rather intricate search pro- 
blems. 

Couldn’t a text be coded with two 
symbols? 

Here’s a line of symbols—only dots 
and dashes. What do they stand for? 


If you know the Morse code, you’ll 
read the word “electron”. It follows 
that various combinations of two 
signs enabled the whole of the ABC 
to be coded. Actually, in the Morse 
code there are three signs, the interval 
(absence of a sign) being the third, 
but the same is true of a two-sign 
code. 

If you studied the Morse code care- 
fully you would have noticed that 
some letters are represented by one 
or two signs: A—dot and dash, I— 
two dots, N—dash and dot, others by 
three or even four: O—three dashes, 
S—three dots, B—dash and three 
dots, J— dot and three dashes. 

Let’s try to find out how many 
signs should there be in a code group 
so that all letters could be designated 
by the same number of zeros and uni- 
ties. To begin with let’s take only two 
signs, 0 and 1. We obtain: 


A=00 c=10 
B=01 D=11 


298 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


wi 


Radiostation 


00100 


sd 


See how one and the same letter can be coded with different symbols. 


This is the limit, and it can’t be 


helped: 2?=4. 
Now, let’s try with three signs: 
A=000 E=100 
B=001 F=101 
c=010 G=110 
D=011 H=111 


This is again the limit: 2°=8. 

If we add one more sign, we’ll get 
24=16. Sixteen combinations isn’t 
enough for our ABC. 


Five signs give us enough combi- 
nations: 25=32. 
Here’s an example of such a code: 


A=+00000 I=01000 
B=00001 J =01001 
Cc=00010 K=01010 
D=00011 L=01011 
E=00100 M=01100 
F=00101 N=01101 
G=00110 0=01110 
H=00111 P=01111 


Q=10000 V=10104 
R=10004 W=10110 
S=10010 X=10111 
T=10011 Y=11000 
U=10100 Z=11001 


Let’s count now the number of 
signs in a code group which would 
enable all digits from 0 to 9 to be 
represented by an equal number of 
zeros and unities. Here, too, two or 
even three signs is not enough, but 
four is: they give us 16 combinations, 
while we need only 40. 

Here’s how the coded digits look: 


0=0000 5=0101 
1=0001 6=0110 
2=0010 7=0114 
3=0011 8=1000 
4—0100 9=1001 


Don’t imagine these codes for di- 
gits and letters are unique—there may 
be billions of them. 

Let’s use our code to code the 
word “cybernetics” and the number 
43”, 

Here’s the word “cybernetics” con- 
cealed in the combination of zeros 
and unities: 00010 11000 00001 00100 
40004 04104 00100 100414 01000 00010 
40010. The number “13” will be written 
like this: 0001 0041. 

There are special, very important 
devices for introducing intelligence 
into the computer, so that it would 
be able to process it. 

These serve as a sort of gates, the 
only ones which provide access to the 
computer. 

But those are not simple gates. 
They are magic gates that transform 


20* 


WORD 299 


the number into a code, make it con- 
venient for the computer to operate 
with. 

The decoding device, also termed 
decipherer, is an absolute “antipode” 
of the coding device. The decipherer 
is a “magician the other way round”; 
its task is to make a “normal number” 
out of the code. 

Coding and decoding are conside- 
red to be among the most important 
logical operations of the “electronic 
brain”. And rightly so, since with 
their aid the computer is able to 
transform numbers into the code, to 
operate with them, and to transform 
them again into an appropriate code 
during the output of processed infor- 
mation. Without these devices the 
computer is powerless. It is interest- 
ing to note that in everyday life we 
continuously come across coding. Not 
only when we introduce symbols for 
the normal text or translate the signs 
of the ABC of one language into those 
of another, but also when a transmis- 
sion from a source to a recipient takes 
place. Thus, in the course of broad- 
casting sound oscillations enter the 
microphone. They are transformed in- 
to electric oscillations and, eventual- 
ly, into electromagnetic waves. In 
this case the coding is done by ex- 
changing one physical quantity for 
another. 

The physical nature of the “letters” 
of such an ABC, too, may be diffe- 
rent. Ink marks on paper, holes in a 
paper tape, perforations punched in 
the cards can all serve as “letters”. 
Different positions of rotating ele- 
ments, electric pulses and light sig- 
nals can also serve as “letters”. Re- 
coding is the operational principle of 
the teletype—the apparatus that with- 
out any human action transforms 


300 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


normal text into combinations of elec- 
tric signals with an appropriate sig- 
nal assigned to each letter, to be fol- 
lowed by a reverse transformation of 
the electric signals into normal let- 
ters. 


When making a telephone call by 
turning the telephone dial you, pro- 
bably, don’t suspect that you are 
engaged in recoding the decimal code 
into a series of electric pulses, which 
can be made visual again with 0 (no 
pulse) and 1 (pulse). 

See how it looks. 


220—65—99 
2 2 0 6 
000000044 000000000 
0000000114 000111114 
5 9 9 
000011114 141111144 
141111144 


Despite the same symbols used (0 
and 1) this is not the binary code. It’s 
a decimal code with the number of 
rotations denoting the decimal or- 
der and a unitary code to denote the 
digits in each order. 


301 


X 


X, Y, Z-CALCULATION 
MATHEMATICS 


A branch of mathematics 
studying methods 

of obtaining numerical solutions 
of mathematical problems 

and of employing 

calculation implements: 


The Good Fairy 


It’s hardly reasonable to entertain 
doubts as to the greatness of mathe- 
matics, for everything in this world 
may be represented in terms of num- 
bers, every change taking place in it 
may be expressed by a mathematical 
dependence. The poet was right in 
saying: “The intelligent number trans- 
mits every shade of meaning.” 


Now, what is mathematics that is 
omnipotent, all-embracing, knows 
practically no limits? 

In the words of Friedrich Engels: 
“Mathematics is a science dealing with 
the space-patterns and the quanti- 
tative relationships of the real 
world.” 

The famous mathematician David 
Hilbert expressed his opinion with a 
feeling of some superiority: “Mathe- 
matics is what competent people sup- 
pose it to be.” Another prominent 
mathematician, the American Wil- 
lard Gibbs, a modest and a reticent 
man, once uttered “mathematics is a 
language”. 

Some people assert that present- 
day mathematics, like art, absorbs 
the phenomena of real life, unites si- 
milar events, processes and facts and 
generalizes them. 

But the statement best reflecting 
the spirit of modern times belongs to 
the prominent contemporary mathe- 
matician, Academician A. Kolmogo- 
tov: “Mathematics is the means peop- 
le use to control nature and themsel- 
ves.” 


The great mathematician Carl Frie- 
drich Gauss described mathematics as 


302 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


the queen of all sciences. But it’s 
rather a good fairy. It provides not 
miraculous means of solving all the 
problems but precise methods. It is 
a fact that mathematics originated 
from the five fingers. However, now- 
adays it may be compared to a great 
city the suburbs of which are in a 
process of continuous expansion, and 
the centre is being rebuilt occasional- 
ly, each time to fit a clearer plan. 
All blocks with tangled bystreets are 
being cleared, and wide avenues laid 
in their place. 

Frankly, modern mathematics is so 
extensive and variegated that even a 
genius cannot master all its branches. 
The mathematicians themselves are 
frequently unable to comprehend each 
other. 

A remark once made by a 
leading mathematician present at one 
of the world mathematical congresses 
was not without foundation: “We 
may not hope to understand every- 
thing, or even the greater part, of 
what we are about to hear.” 

And yet, we live in an era of num- 
bers and analysis, and this implies 
rapid advances not only in the vast 
theoretical field, but also in the prac- 
tical field of mathematics. 

This latter field serves nowadays 
essentially as a sort of tool for science 
and technology. 

Academician A. Krylov, an erudi- 
te mathematician, once said: “This is 
a tool, quite like the caliper, the 
chisel, the hammer, the file for the 
locksmith or the axe and the saw for 
the carpenter.” 

Of course, mathematics is a much 
more intricate tool, since to solve an 
equation one has to obtain a numeri- 
cal solution. And this at present is 
not so easy. 


Up to a quarter million precise 
numerical data may be obtained as a 
result of wind-tunnel tests of a 
model. 

Billions of parameters are received 
daily by the weather forecast bureau. 
And how great is the volume of nume- 
rical data in census, opinion polls, 
commerce statistics. Even purely the- 
oretical studies of the generation of 
new heavy nuclear particles require 
the evaluation and processing of so- 
me 102 thousand photographs of nuc- 
lear reactions. 

Quite recently, some 20 years ago, 
one couldn’t hope to be able to cal- 
culate different variants of spaceship 
motion, nuclear reactor operation, gas 
flow in ultra-high-speed streams, in- 
teratomic forces or nuclear accele- 
rators within a reasonable spell of 
time. 

Nowadays such calculations do not 
present unsurmountable problems for 
scientists. The ancient science of ma- 
thematics profited from new methods 
and new means. 

To take one example. The mathe- 
matician Schenks spent his life in 
the effort to calculate the number x 
to an accuracy of 707 decimal signs. 
This result earned for itselfthe fame 
of a calculation record of the 19th 
century. The gravestone of the ma- 
thematician rightly bears no inscrip- 
tion, only the sign x. Nowadays a 
computer doesn’t take long to calcu- 
late this number to the accuracy of 
2035 decimal signs! : 

The birth of computer technology 
prompted the development of calcula- 
tion mathematics, and mathematical 
abstractions began to pervade every- 
day life. 

Today is the time to speak not only 
of the mathematization of science, 


but of the mathematization of life as 
well. No small part is played here by 
calculation mathematics. Had it not 
taken the trouble to modernize cal- 
culation methods, no less than half 
the population of the world would 
have to be continuously employed in 
performing calculations. 

Eminent mathematicians knew that 
without a well-developed technique of 
calculations the enormous structure 
of theoretical mathematics may be- 
come a gigantic isolated tower. Abs- 
tract theories locked in this tower 
would be destined to die a slow 


X, Y, Z—CALCULATION MATHEMATICS 303 


death. Life-giving connections between 
theoretical mathematics and practice 
exercised through the media of the 
mathematics and the technology of 
calculations help man in his practical 
activities and promote advances in 
mathematical science. 

The constant motto of the creators 
of calculation mathematics is to take 
a short road from complex mathema- 
tical equations to concrete numbers, 
to speed up the step-by-step move- 
ment of numbers and to free man 
(the conductor of numbers) from tir- 
ing work. 


The history of the mathematics of calculations is quite edifying. Unhappily, 


the lack of space prevents us from telling the full story, and we are compelled to 


confine ourselves to a few sketches. 


The Greek astronomers used mathematical methods to study the laws of plane- 
tary motion. They have done much to further calculation mathematics. 

The studies of the famous mathematician and astronomer from the city of Ale- 
xandria Claudius Ptolemy sum up the works of Greek mathematicians. He lived 


A Babylonian cuneiform inscription depicts a square with a diagonal. Its side is equal to 30, 
and this is written in the left upper part. The approximate value of 2 is written alongside the 


diagonal. 


304 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


Polygon with 800 355 168 sides 


Ulugh Beg 


The eminent mathematician and astronomer Ulugh Beg calculated the ratio of the circumfe- 
rence to the radius, i.e. the number 2z, to sixteen signs after decimal point. Gradually increas- 
ing the number of the sides of the regular polygon to approximate the circumference he obtained 
a polygon of 800355168 sides! 


in the first half of the 2nd century A.D. and left behind 13 volumes entitled The 
Great Collection, or the Great Construction. This was a kind of contemporary en- 
cyclopaedia of astronomical knowledge. It has reached us under the Greek-Arab 
title of Almagest. 

Almagest contains the results of enormous calculation work performed by Pto- 
lemy. They were presented in the form of sine tables and were intended to help 
astronomers in their work. 

The tables could be used to find the sines of arcs up to 90° in increments of a 
quarter of a degree. The Pythagoras theorem enabled any element (a side or an 
angle) of a rectangular triangle to be calculated from two known elements. 

The Ptolemy table is the first trigonometric table to reach us. 

The prolonged period of Roman supremacy in Europe was not marked by any 
conspicuous achievement in mathematics, but for the Greek scientist Diophan- 
tus (8rd century A.D.) who introduced into algebra some original algebraic 
equations. The invention of the logarithm proved of paramount importance 
to calculation techniques. It affected the entire methodology of mathematical 
problem solution. People familiar with the use of logarithms from their school 
days can hardly imagine the marvel and excitement caused by their appear- 
ance. 

The great scientist P. Laplace wrote: “The invention of the logarithm, by 
curtailing the calculations of several months to a matter of several days, seems 
to double the life of an astronomer.” 


X, Y, Z—CALCULATION MATHEMATICS 305 


He spoke of astronomers because he was an astronomer himself and because it 
was they who in those times had to perform the most complex and tedious calcu- 
lations. 

The word “logarithm” is Greek. It is made up of two words: “logos”— “ratio” 
and “arithmos”—‘“number”. Thus, “logarithm” means “a number which mea- 
sures a ratio”. 

What is the basis of the wonderful properties of these numbers designed to 
facilitate calculations, of the tables you use in your mathematics lessons? 

Some simple examples will help you to get a clear notion. 

Let’s take some number, say 2, and compile a table of integer powers of this 
number. 

The upper line in the table is an arithmetical progression with the difference 
equal to unity, the lower is a geometrical progression with the denominator equal 
to 2. This table may already be used to simplify calculations. 

Let’s try to multiply 16X32 with the aid of this table. The numbers in the 
upper line of the table directly above these numbers are 4 and 5. Add them up and 
obtain 9. In the lower line directly below the nine stands the number 512. This 
is the result sought. Indeed, 16x32=512. 

In almost the same way one may find the quotient, for instance, of 8 divided 
by 1/,,- But now one has to take the difference of numbers in the table directly abo- 
ve the former numbers. It is equal to 7 since the difference of 3—(—4) after the 


It is shown above that the more simple operations with numbers performed in the arithmetical 
progression correspond to those performed in the geometrical progression. 


Geometrical 
progression Progression 
Multiplication 


Extracting the root Division 


306 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


2h 


3h 


4h 


brackets are opened adds up to 7. The 
lower line below this difference shows 
the required quotient: 128. 

And such a complicated operation 
as the extraction of a cube root from 
a three-digit number is performed 
with the greatest of ease. 

Judge for yourselves. A glance at 
the table, and we find the power of 2 
corresponding to 512. It is 9. Now di- 
vide it by the power of 3 (the cube 
root) and obtain the answer below the 
quotient of 3: it’s 8. This is the value 
of the cube root. 

Our table is quite primitive, but it 
does give an impression of the general 
properties of the terms of the arith- 
metical and the geometrical progres- 
sions which may be used to simplify 
calculations. How should this be 
done? 

To explain it in words would take 
many tiresome phrases. Here’s a figure 
for everyone to see that addition and 
subtraction in the arithmetical pro- 
gression correspond to the multipli- 
cation and division in the geometrical 
progression, while raising to a power 
and root extraction are replaced by 
multiplication and division. 

Arrange all the eight operations we 
have been talking about in the order 
of their complexity, and your table 
will turn into wonderful steps: one 
step simplifies the operation, another 
makes it quite easy! 

Naturally, the table compiled by us 
is good only for calculations with in- 
tegers, and even these may not be 
chosen at will. 


The relationship between the distance co- 
vered (S) and time (¢) is logarithmic. The 
Napier curve shows this. 


X, Y, Z—CALCULATION MATHEMATICS 307 


Real working logarithm tables for accurate calculations were first compiled 
by John Napier. It took this prominent Scotch mathematician twenty years 
to complete the job. Napier explains the reasons for his work as follows: 

“IT have tried to do everything in my power torid myself of the difficulty 
and ennui of calculations the tediousness of which usually scares a lot of people 
away from studying mathematics.” 

The work of Napier is of outstanding importance because he was the first 
to divulge the essence of the logarithm, a mathematical quantity hitherto un- 
known. 


The study of dynamic processes often in- Mathematics was able to sense the limit 
volves the solution of extremely complex when rectangular steps turn into a smooth 
differential equations. curve. It found the limit of an infinite 


sum (S) when the number of the additives 
is increased to infinity while each of them 
tends to zero. This limit is termed integral. 


308 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


The value of this discovery for the mathematics of calculations was as great 
as that of the discovery of the trigonometric functions. 

Three hundred and fifty years passed since Napier made his ingenious inven- 
tion. During this time over 500 types of logarithm tables were devised. They took 
a firm place in the arsenal of calculation implements and to this day occupy a 
position of honour as man’s aid in calculations. 

Millions of specialists use logarithms in their everyday work, from the highly 
accurate twenty-plus sign tables to the “wooden” logarithms, slide rules, indispen- 
sable instruments for technical calculations. 

People always lived in a world of incessant motion and continue to do so now. 

Everything around us is in motion: the mutual position of the planets, of the 
solar system, air pressure and temperature, forces active in a machine, currents 
flowing in an electric circuit, the state of a living cell all change in the course 
of time. 

The speeds of other processes are enormous, and their duration quite short: some 
hundredths, thousandths or millionths of a second. Swift is the drop in air pres- 
sure in a region of an approaching cyclone. Colossal is the acceleration of ele- 
mentary particles in a synchrotron: it takes them seconds to cover cosmic dis- 
tances. 

When studying these so-called dynamic processes scientists are primarily inte- 
rested in changes taking place in time. 

To analyse and calculate these processes mathematical methods are needed which 
would be able, like an ultra-high-speed camera, to sense changes taking place 
within the minutest time intervals. 

The part of such a “camera” in calculations came to be played by the methods 


Mathematicians made a startling discovery: the regularities governing random quantities are 
themselves not fortuitous. This makes it possible to assess the frequencies of various deviations 
from the point of aim. 


X, Y, Z—CALCULATION MATHEMATICS 309 


of the differential and integral calculus, the science of varying quantities. It was 
created by the mathematical genii Leibnitz, Newton, Euler and their disciples. 

But it is one thing to study phenomena as regular as the change from day to 
night, or the alternation of the year’s seasons, and quite another to investigate 
processes liable to be affected by various fortuitous circumstances. 

A coin thrown into the air is bound to fall to the ground. Even the time it takes 
it to do so may be calculated. 

But no calculation will be able to predict which side down it will fall: heads 
or tails. It may fall any way, this being dependent on numerous fortuitous cir- 
cumstances. 

Such eminent mathematicians as Pascal and Fermat evinced interest in games 
the outcome of which was based on random events. A new branch of human know- 
ledge came into being, the theory of probability. It was proved that probability 
is a quantity which may be measured. 

But it was only in the 19th century that thanks to the endeavours of such mathe- 
maticians as Gauss, Chebyshev, Markov, Lyapunov, the theory of probability 
developed into a separate branch of science, a branch of mathematics the practi- 


cal importance of which became stupendous. 


Many eminent scientists spent a lot 
of time on tedious calculations trying 
to discover new roads in mathematics 
and to check their calculations. 

Mathematicians-calculators do not 
build machines or houses, there are 
no scales, test-tubes, galvanometers, 
or microscopes in their studies. They 
do not conduct experiments. But ma- 
thematicians arm the machine desig- 
ner and the architect, the physicist 
and the chemist, the biologist and the 
economist with the skill to solve pro- 
blems, with the most up-to-date ma- 
thematical methods. 

Together, we witnessed the time 
calculation mathematics left its 
cradle. 

Having been born to satisfy prac- 
tical requirements it itself is now in- 
fluencing theoretical developments, 
demanding of the theory new, more 
efficient methods differing in princip- 
le from the previous ones. 

Today calculation mathematics 
evolves rules for the numerical cal- 


culation of various mathematical pro- 
blems, assesses the complexity, the 
cost in labour and the accuracy of the 
algorithms and of the methods of 
compiling computer programmes for 
them. This is a vast task, for some al- 
gorithms contain up to a billion arith- 
metical operations. 

The mathematics of calculations 
helps not only its wards: mechanics, 
physics and astronomy, but also such, 
apparently, distant disciplines as geo- 
logy, medicine, linguistics and eco- 
nomics. 

Here, too, mathematics learned how 
to reduce the problem to a “num- 
ber”. 

Calculation mathematics grew far 
and wide. It needs a great many spe- 
cialists. 

The most authoritative mathema- 
ticians are of the opinion that now 
is the time to introduce the elements 
of calculation mathematics and com- 
puter technology into secondary- 
school programmes. 


310 CYBERNETICS A TO Z 


“They are waiting. for you, young» 


men,” says Academician Vinogradov, 
addressing himself to young people. 
“It will be up to you to make use of 
mathematics to lay courses to distant 
planets and, possibly, to the stars, 


to build machines that will liberate 
man’s creative forces from rough phy- 
sical and mental work. This is a job 
of the next decades, and you should 
be ready for it.” 


To the reader 


Mir Publishers welcome your 
comments on the content, 
translation and design 

of this book. 

We would also be pleased to 
receive any Suggestions you care 


to make about our publications. 
Our address is: 

USSR, 129820, Moscow I-110, GSP 
Pervy Rizhsky Pereulok, 2 

MIR PUBLISHERS 


Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 